
# BOOK II. Early Christian Thought. 

## FOREWORD 

We now turn back chronologically to the point from which we started in our survey of classical science and magic in order to trace the development of Christian thought in regard to the same subjects. How far did Christianity break with ancient science and superstition? To what extent did it borrow from them? 

### Magic and religion. 

It has often been remarked that, as a new religion comes to prevail in a society, the old rites are discredited and prohibited as magic. The faith and ceremonies of the majority, performed publicly, are called religion: the discarded cult, now practiced only privately and covertly by a minority, is stigmatized as magic and contrary to the general good. Thus we shall hear Christian writers condemn the pagan oracles and auguries as arts of divination, and classify the ancient gods as demons of the same sort as those invoked in the magic arts. Conversely, when a new religion is being introduced, is as yet regarded as a foreign faith, and is still only the private worship of a minority, the majority regard it as outlandish magic. And this we shall find illustrated by the accusations of sorcery and magic heaped upon Jesus by the Jews, and upon the Jews and the early Christians by a world long accustomed to pagan rites. The same bandying back and forth of the charge of magic occurred between Mohammed and the Meccans. [^337:1] 

 [^337:1]: Sir William Muir, "_Ancient Arabic Poetry, its Genuineness and Authenticity_," in Royal Asiatic Society's Journal (1882), p. 30. 

### Relation between early Cristian and medieval literature.

It is perhaps generally assumed that the men of the middle ages were widely read in and deeply influenced by the fathers of the early church, but at least for our subject this influence has hardly been treated either broadly or in detail. Indeed, the predilection of the humanists of the  fifteenth and sixteenth centuries for anything written in Greek and their aversion to medieval Latin has too long operated as a bar to the study of medieval literature in general. And scholars who have edited or studied the Greek, Syriac, and other ancient texts connected with early Christianity have perhaps too often neglected the Latin versions preserved in medieval manuscripts, or, while treasuring up every hint that Photius lets fall, have failed to note the citations and allusions in medieval Latin encyclopedists. Yet it is often the case that the manuscripts containing the Latin versions are of earlier date than those which seem to preserve the Greek original text. 

###  Method of presenting early Christian thought.
 
There is so much repetition and resemblance between the numerous Christian writers in Greek and Latin of the Roman Empire that I have even less than in the case of their classical contemporaries attempted a complete presentation of them, but, while not intending to omit any account of the first importance in the history of magic or experimental science, have aimed to make a selection of representative persons and typical passages. At the same time, in the case of those authors and works which are discussed, the aim is to present their thought in sufficiently specific detail to enable the reader to estimate for himself their scientific or superstitious character and their relations to classical thought on the one hand and medieval thought on the other. 

Before we treat of Christian writings themselves it is essential to notice some related lines of thought and groups of writings which either preceded or accompanied the development of Christian thought and literature, and which either influenced even orthodox thought powerfully, or illustrate foreign elements, aberrations, side-currents, and undertows which none the less cannot be disregarded in tracing the main current of Christian belief. We therefore shall successively treat of the literature extant under the name of Enoch, of the works of Philo Judaeus, of the doctrines of the Gnostics, of the Christian _Apocrypha_, of the _Pseudo-Clementines_ and Simon Magus, and of the Confession of Cyprian and some similar stories. We shall then make Origen's _Reply to Celsus_, in which the conflict of classical and Christian conceptions is well illustrated, our point of departure in an examination of the attitude of the early fathers towards magic and science. Succeeding chapters will treat of the attitude toward magic of other fathers before Augustine, of Christianity and natural science as shown in Basil's _Hexaemeron_, Epiphanius' _Panarion_, and the _Physiologus_, and of Augustine himself. A final chapter on the fusion of paganism and Christianity in the fourth and fifth centuries will terminate this second division of our investigation and also serve as a supplement to the preceding division and an introduction to the third book on the early middle ages. Our arrangement is thus in part topical rather than strictly chronological. The dates of many authors and works are too dubious, there is too much of the apocryphal and interpolated, and we have to rely too much upon later writers for the views of earlier ones, to make a strictly or even primarily chronological arrangement either advisable or feasible. 

# Chapter XIII 

## The Book of Enoch 

### Enoch's reputation as an astrologer in the middle ages. 

In collections of medieval manuscripts there often is found a treatise on fifteen stars, fifteen herbs, fifteen stones, and fifteen figures engraved upon them, which is attributed sometimes to Hermes, presumably Trismegistus, and sometimes to Enoch, the patriarch, who 

> "walked with God and was not." [^340:1] 

 [^340:1]: Ascribed to Enoch in Harleian MS 1612, fol. 15r, Incipit: "Enoch tanquam unus ex philosophis super res quartum librum edidit, in quo voluit determinare ista quatuor : videlicet de xv stellis, de xv herbis, de xv lapidibus preciosis et de xv figuris ipsis lapidibus sculpendis," and Wolfenbiittel 2725, 14th century, fols. 83-94V; BN 13014, 14th century, fol. 174V; Amplon, Quarto 381 (Erfurt), 14th century, fols. 42-45 : for "Enoch's prayer" see Sloane MS 3821, 17th century, fols. 190V-193.   
 Ascribed to Hermes in Harleian 80, Sloane 3847, Royal 12-C- XVni; Berlin 963, fol. 105; Vienna 5216, 15th century, fols. 63r-66v; "Dixit Enoch quod 15 sunt stelle / ex tractatu Heremeth (i- e. Hermes) et enoch compilatum"; and in the Catalogue of Amplonius (1412 A.D.), Math. 53. See below, H, 220-21.  
 The stars are probably fifteen in number because Ptolemy distinguished that many stars of first magnitude. Dante, Paradiso, XIII, 4, also speaks of "quindici stelle." See Orr (1913), pp. 154-6, where Ptolemy's descriptions of the fifteen stars of first magnitude and their modern names are given. 

Indeed in the prologue to a Hermetic work on astrology in a medieval manuscript we are told that Enoch and the first of the three Hermeses or Mercuries are identical. [^340:2]  

 [^340:2]: Digby 67, late 12th century, fol. 69r, "Prologus de tribiis Mercuriis." They are also identified by other medieval writers. Some would further identify with Enoch Nannacus or Annacus, king of Phrygia, who foresaw Deucalion's flood and lamented. See J.G.Frazer (1918), I, 155-6, and P. Buttmann, Mythologus, Berlin, 1828- 1829, and E.Babelon, _La tradition phrygienne du deluge_, in Rev. d. I hist. d. religs., XXHI (1891), which he cites. Roger Bacon stated that some would identify Enoch with "the great Hermogenes, whom the Greeks much commend and laud, and they ascribe to him all secret and celestial science." Steele (1920) 99. 

This treatise probably has no direct relation to the _Book of Enoch_, which we shall discuss in this chapter and which was composed in the pre-Christian period. But it is interesting to observe that the same reputation for astrology, which led the middle ages sometimes to ascribe this treatise to Enoch, is likewise found in "the first notice of a book of Enoch," which "appears to be due to a Jewish or Samaritan Hellenist," which "has come down to us successively through Alexander Polyhistor and Eusebius," and which states that Enoch was the founder of astrology. [^341:1] The statement in Genesis that Enoch lived three hundred and sixty-five years would also lead men to associate him with the solar year and stars. 

 [^341:1]: R. H. Charles, _The Book of Enoch_, Oxford, 1893, p. 33, citing Euseb. Praep. Evan., ix, 17, 8 (Gaisford).

### Date and influence of the literature ascribed to Enoch.

_The Book of Enoch_ is "the precipitate of a literature. once very active, which revolved . . . round Enoch," and in the form which has come down to us is a patchwork from "several originally independent books." [^341:2] 

 [^341:2]: Charles (1893), p. 10, citing Ewald. 

It is extant in the form of Greek fragments preserved in the Chronography of G. Syncellus, [^341:3] 

 [^341:3]: ed. Dindorf, 1829. 

or but lately discovered in (Upper) Egypt, and in more complete but also more recent manuscripts giving an Ethiopic and a Slavonic version. [^341:4] 

 [^341:4]: Lods, Ad. _Le Livre d'Henoch, Fragments grecs decouverts a Akhmin_, Paris, 1892. Charles, R. H., _The Book of Enoch_, Oxford, 1893, "translated from Professor Dillman's Ethiopic text, amended and revised in accordance with hitherto uncollated Ethiopic manuscripts and with the Gizeh and other Greek and Latin fragments, which are here published in full." The Book of Enoch, translated anew, etc., Oxford, 1912. Also translated in Charles (1913) II, 163-281. There are twenty-nine Ethiopic MSS of Enoch. Charles, R. H., and Morfill, W. R., The Book of the Secrets of Enoch, translated from the Slavonic, Oxford, 1896. Also by Forbes and Charles in Charles (1913) II. 425-69. 

These last two versions are quite different both in language and content, while some of the citations of Enoch in ancient writers apply to neither of these versions. While "Ethiopic did not exist as a literary language before 350 A. D.," [^341:5]  

 [^341:5]: Charles (1893), p. 22. 

and none of the extant manuscripts of the Ethiopic version is earlier than the fifteenth century [^342:1] Charles believes that they are based upon a Greek translation of the Hebrew and Aramaic original, and that even the interpolations in this were made by an editor living before the Christian era. 

 [^342:1]: Charles (1913), II, 165-6. 

> He asserts that nearly all the writers of the New Testament were familiar with it," and influenced by it, - in fact that its influence on the New Testament was greater than that of all the other apocrypha together, and that it "had all the weight of a canonical book" with the early church fathers. [^342:2] 

 [^342:2]: Charles (1893), pp. 2 and 41. 

After 300 A. D., however, it became discredited, except as we have seen among Ethiopic and Slavonic Christians.  
Before 300 Origen in his _Reply to Celsus_ [^342:3] accuses his opponent of quoting _The Book of Enoch_ as a Christian authority concerning the fallen angels. 

 [^342:3]: V., 54. 

Origen objects that "the books which bear the name Enoch do not at all circulate in the Churches as divine." Augustine, in the City of God, [^342:4] written between 413 and 426, admits that Enoch 

 [^342:4]: XV, 23

> "left some divine writings, for this is asserted by the Apostle Jude in his canonical epistle." 

But he doubts if any of the writings current in his own day are genuine and thinks that they have been wisely excluded from the course of Scripture. Lods writes that after the ninth century in the east and from a much earlier date in the west, _The Book of Enoch_ is not mentioned, 

> "At the most some medieval rabbis seem still to know of it." [^342:5] 

 [^342:5]: Introd., vi.

Yet Alexander Neckam, in the twelfth century, speaks as if Latin Christendom of that date had some acquaintance with the Enoch literature. We shall note some passages in Saint Hildegard which seem parallel to others in _The Book of Enoch_, while Vincent of Beauvais in his _Speculum naturale_ in the thirteenth century, in justifying a certain discriminating use of the apocryphal books, points out that Jude quotes Enoch whose book is now called apocryphal. [^342:6] 

 [^342:6]:  _Spec. Nat._, I, g. A Latin fragment, found in the British Museum XV, 23. in 1893 by Dr.M.R.James and published in the Cambridge _Texts and Studies_, II, 3, Apocrypha Anecdota, pp. 146-50, "seems to point to a Latin translation of Enoch" Charles (1913) II, 167. 

### Angels governing the universe; stars and angels.

The Enoch literature has much to say concerning angels, and implies their control of nature, man, and the future.  We hear of 

> Raphael, "who is set over all the diseases and wounds of the children of men"; 

> Gabriel, "who is set over all the powers"; 

>Phanuel, "who is set over the repentance and hope of those who inherit eternal _life_." [^343:1] 

 [^343:1]: _Book of Enoch_, XL, 9.

The revolution of the stars is described as "according to the number of the angels," and in the Slavonic version the number of those angels is stated as two hundred. [^343:2] 

 [^343:2]: _Book of Enoch_, XLIII,  Secrets of Enoch, IV.

Indeed the stars themselves are often personified and we read "how they keep faith with each other" and even of "all the stars whose privy members are like those of horses." [^343:3] 

 [^343:3]: _Book of Enoch_, XLIII; XC, 21. 

The Ethiopic version also speaks of the angels or spirits of hoarfrost, dew, hail, snow and so forth. [^343:4] 

 [^343:4]: _Book of Enoch_, LX, 17-18.

In the Slavonic version Enoch finds in the sixth heaven the angels who attend to the phases of the moon and the revolutions of stars and sun and who superintend the good or evil condition of the world. He finds angels set over the years and seasons, the rivers and sea, the fruits of the earth, and even an angel over every herb. [^343:5] 

 [^343:5]: Secrets of Enoch, XIX. 

### The fallen angels teach men magic and other arts.

The fallen angels in particular are mentioned in the Book of Enoch. Two hundred angels lusted after the comely daughters of men and bound themselves by oaths to marry them. [^343:6] 

 [^343:6]: Caps. VI-XI in both Charles and Lods.

After having thus taken unto themselves wives, they instructed the human race in the art of magic and the science of botany - or to be more exact, "charms and enchantments" and "the cutting of roots and of woods." In another chapter various individual angels are named who taught respectively the enchanters and botanists, the breaking of charms, astrology, and various branches thereof." [^343:7] 

 [^343:7]: Book of Enoch, VIII, 3, in IV. both Charles and Lods. 

In the Greek fragment preserved by Syncellus there are further mentioned pharmacy, and what probably denote geomancy ("sign of the earth") and aeromancy (aeroskopia). Through this revelation of mysteries which should have been kept hid we are told that men 

> "know all the secrets of the angels, and all the violence of the Satans, and all their occult power, and all the power of those who practice sorcery, and the power of witchcraft, and the power of those who make molten images for the whole earth." [^344:1] 

 [^344:1]: _Book of Enoch_, LXV, 6. 

The revelation included, moreover, not only magic arts, witchcraft, divination, and astrology, but also natural sciences, such as botany and pharmacy - which, however, are apparently regarded as closely akin to magic - and useful arts such as mining metals, manufacturing armor and weapons, and "writing with ink and paper" - "and thereby many sinned from eternity to eternity and until this day." [^344:2] 

 [^344:2]: _Book of Enoch_, LXV, 7-8; LXIX, 6-9. 

As the preceding remark indicates, the author is decidedly of the opinion that men were not created to the end that they should write with pen and ink. "For man was created exactly like the angels to the intent that he should continue righteous and pure, . . . but through this their knowledge men are perishing." [^344:3] 

 [^344:3]: _Book of Enoch_, LXIX, 10-14.

Perhaps the writer means to censure writing as magical and thinks of it only as mystic signs and characters. Magic is always regarded as evil in the Enoch literature, and witchcraft, enchantments, and "devilish magic" are given a prominent place in a list in the Slavonic version [^344:4] of evil deeds done upon earth. 

 [^344:4]: Secrets of Enoch, X.

### The stars as sinners.

In connection with the fallen angels we find the stars regarded as capable of sin as well as personified. In the Ethiopic version there is more than one mention of seven stars that transgressed the command of God and are bound against the day of judgment or for the space of ten thousand years. [^344:5] 

 [^344:5]: _Book of Enoch_, XVIII, XXI 

One passage tells how "judgment was held first over the stars, and they were judged and found guilty, and went to the place of condemnation, and they were cast into an abyss." [^344:6] 

 [^344:6]: _Book of Enoch_, XC, 24.

A similar identification of the stars with the fallen angels is found in one of the visions of Saint Hildegard in the twelfth century. She writes, 

> "I saw a great star most splendid and beautiful, and with it an exceeding multitude of falling sparks which with the star followed southward. And they examined Him upon His throne almost as something hostile, and turning from Him, they sought rather the north. And suddenly they were all annihilated, being turned into black coals . . . and cast into the abyss that I could see them no more." [^345:1] 

She then interprets the vision as signifying the fall of the angels. 

 [^345:1]: Singer's translation. Studies in the History and Method of Science, Vol. I, p. 53, of Scivias, III, I, in Migne, PL, 197, 565. See also the Koran XV, 18.

### Effect of sin upon nature.

An idea which we shall find a number of times in other Effect of ancient and medieval writers appears also in the Book of nature. Enoch. It is that human sin upsets the world of nature, and in this particular case, even the period of the moon and the orbits of the stars. [^345:2] 

 [^345:2]: Charles, p. 32 and cap. LXXX.

Hildegard again roughly parallels the Enoch literature by holding that the original harmony of the four elements upon this earth was changed into a confused and disorderly mixture after the fall of man. [^345:3] 

 [^345:3]: Singer, 25-26.

### Celestial phenomena.

The natural world, although intimately associated with Celestial the spiritual world and hardly distinguished from it in the phenomena Enoch literature, receives considerable attention, and much of the discussion in both the Ethiopic and Slavonic versions is of a scientific rather than ethical or apocalyptic character. One section of the Ethiopic version is described by Charles [^345:4] as the _Book of Celestial Physics_ and upholds a calendar based upon the lunar year. 

 [^345:4]: Pp. 187-219. 

The Slavonic version, on the other hand, while mentioning the lunar year of 354 days and the solar year of 365 and one quarter days, seems to prefer the latter, since the years of Enoch's _Life_ are given as 365, and he writes 366 books concerning what he has seen in his visions and voyages. [^345:5]

 [^345:5]: Secrets of Enoch, I and XXX.

 _The Book of Enoch_ supposes a plurality of heavens. [^345:6] 

 [^345:6]: See Morfill-Charles, pp. xxxiv- xxxv, for mention of three and seven heavens in the apocryphal Testaments of the Twelve Patriarchs, "written about or before the beginning of the Christian era," and for "the probability of an Old Testament belief in the plurality of the heavens." For the seven heavens in the apocryphal Ascension of Isaiah see Charles' edition of that work (1900), xlix. 

In the Slavonic version Enoch is taken through the seven heavens, or ten heavens in one manuscript, with the signs of the zodiac in the eighth and ninth. An account is also given of the creation, and the waters above the firmament, which were to give the early Christian apologists and medieval clerical scientists so much difficulty, are described as follows: 

>"And thus I made firm the waters, that is, the depths, and I surrounded the waters with light, and I created seven circles, and I fashioned them like crystal, moist and dry, that is to say, like glass and ice, and as for the waters and also the other elements I showed each of them their paths, (viz.) to the seven stars, each of them in their heaven, how they should go." [^346:1] 

 [^346:1]: Secrets of Enoch, XXVII. Charles prefaces this passage by the remark, "I do not pretend to understand what follows": but it seems clear that the waters above the firmament are referred to from what the author goes on to say, "And thus I made firm the circles of the heavens, and caused the waters below which are under the heavens to be gathered into one place." It would also seem that each of the seven planets is represented as moving in a sphere of crystal. In the Ethiopic version, LIV, 8, we are told that the water above the heavens is masculine, and that the water beneath the earth is feminine; also LX, 7-8, that Leviathan is female and Behemoth male

The order of the seven planets in their circles is given as follows: in the first and highest circle the star Kruno, then Aphrodite or Venus, Ares (Mars), the sun, Zeus (Jupiter), Hermes (Mercury), and the moon. [^346:2] 

 [^346:2]: _Secrets of Enoch_, XXX.

God also tells Enoch that the duration of the world will be for a week of years, that is, seven thousand, after which 

> "let there be at the beginning of the eighth thousand a time when there is no computation and no end; neither years nor months nor weeks nor days nor hours." [^346:3] 

 [^346:3]: _Secrets of Enoch_, 45-46, see also the _Ethiopic Book of Enoch_, XCIII, for "seven weeks." 

### Mountains and metals.

Turning from celestial physics to terrestrial phenomena, we may note a few allusions to minerals, vegetation, and -animals. "Seven mountains of magnificent stones" are more than once mentioned in the Ethiopic version and are described as each different from the other. [^346:4] 

 [^346:4]: _Book of Enoch_, XVIII, XXIV.

Another passage speaks of "seven mountains full of choice nard and aromatic trees and cinnamon and pepper." [^346:5] 

 [^346:5]: _Book of Enoch_, XXXII. 

But whether these groups of seven mountains are to be astrologically related to the seven planets is not definitely stated. We are also left in doubt whether the following passage may have some astrological or even alchemical significance, or whether it is merely a figurative prophecy like that in the Book of Daniel concerning the image seen by Nebuchadnezzar in his dream. 

> "There mine eyes saw all the hidden things of heaven that shall be, an iron mountain, and one of copper, and one of silver, and one of gold, and one of soft metal, and one of lead." [^347:1] 

 [^347:1]: _Book of Enoch_, LII, 2.

At any rate Enoch has come very near to listing the seven metals usually associated with the seven planets. In another passage we are informed that while silver and "soft metal" come from the earth, lead and tin are produced by a fountain in which an eminent angel stands. [^347:2] 

 [^347:2]: _Book of Enoch_, LXV, 7-8. 

### Strange animals.

As for animals we are informed that Behemoth is male Strange and Leviathan female. [^347:3] 

 [^347:3]: _Book of Enoch_, LX, 7

When Enoch went to the ends of the earth he saw there great beasts and birds who differed in appearance, beauty, and voice. [^347:4] 

 [^347:4]: _Book of Enoch_, XXXIII. 

In the Slavonic version we hear a good deal of phoenixes and chalky dry, who seem to be flying dragons. These creatures are described as "strange in appearance with the feet and tails of lions and the heads of crocodiles. Their appearance was of a purple color like the rainbow; their size, nine hundred measures. Their wings were like those of angels, each with twelve, and they attend the chariot of the sun, and go with him, bringing heat and dew as they are ordered by God." [^347:5] 

 [^347:5]: _Secrets of Enoch_, XII, XV, XIX. 






