
# Chapter XXI 

## Christianity and natural science: Basil, Epiphanius, and the Physiologus 

### Lactantius not a fair example. 

The opposition of early Christian thought to natural science has been rather unduly exaggerated. For instance, Lactantius, one of the least favorable to Greek philosophy and natural science of the fathers, should hardly be cited as typical of early Christian attitude in such matters. Nor does his opposition impress one as weighty.  [^480:1]  

 [^480:1]: Beazley, _Dawn of Modern Geography_, I, 274, says, "Augustine and Chrysostom felt and spoke in the same way, though in more measured language, and nearly all early Christian writers who touched upon the matter did so to echo the voice of authorities so unquestioned." But I cannot agree with this statement. He goes on to imply that a majority of the fathers, like Cosmas Indicopleustes, attacked the belief in the sphericity of the earth; but here, too, I wonder if he is not  following Letronne, _Des Opinions Cosmographiques des Peres_, without having examined the citations, Certainly no such attitude is found in Basil's _Hexaemeron_, Hom. 3 and 9 as the citation implies. I have not seen Marinelli, La geographia e i Padri delta Chiesa, estratto dal Bollettino della Societd geografica italiana, anno 1882, pp. 11-15. 

He ridicules the theory of the Antipodes,  [^480:2]  which he perhaps understands none too well, asking if anyone can be so inept as to think that there are men whose feet are above their heads, although he knows very well that Greek science teaches that all weights fall towards the center of the earth, and that consequently if the feet are nearer the center of the earth that they must be below the head. He continues, however, to insist that the philosophers are either very stupid, or just joking, or arguing for the sake of arguing, and he declares that he could show by many arguments that the heaven cannot possibly be lower than the earth - which no one has asserted except himself - if it were not already time to close his third book and begin the fourth. Apparently Lactantius is the one who is arguing for the sake of arguing, or just joking, or else very stupid, and I fear it is the last. But other Christian fathers were less dense, and we already have heard the cultured pagan Plutarch scoff at the notion of a spherical earth and of antipodes. We may grant, however, that the ecclesiastical writers of the Roman Empire and early medieval period normally treat of spiritual rather than material themes and discuss them in a religious rather than a scientific manner. 

 [^480:2]: Divin. Instit., Ill,24. 

### Commentaries on the Biblical account of creation.

But in the commentaries upon the books of the Bible which the fathers multiplied so voluminously it was necessary for them, if they began their labors with Genesis, to deal at the very start in the first verses of the first book of the Bible with an explanation of nature which at several points was in disagreement with the accepted theories of Greek philosophy and ancient science. Such comment upon the opening verses of Genesis sometimes developed into a separate treatise called _Hexaemeron_ from the works of the six days of creation which it discussed. Of the various treatises of this type the _Hexaemeron_ of Basil  [^481:1]  

 [^481:1]: Migne, PG, vol. 29; PN, vol.8.

seems to have been both the best  [^481:2]  and the most influential, and will be considered by us as an example of Christian attitude towards the natural science and, to some extent, the superstition of the ancient world. 

 [^481:2]: Duhem (1914) II, 394, however, prefers Gregory of Nyssa's  work as "a la fois plus sobre, plus  concis, et plus philosophique..." 

## Basil of Caesarea

Basil of Caesarea, also called Saint Basil the Great (Greek: Ἅγιος Βασίλειος ὁ Μέγας, Ágios Basíleios o Mégas; Coptic: Ⲡⲓⲁⲅⲓⲟⲥ Ⲃⲁⲥⲓⲗⲓⲟⲥ; 329 or 330[8] – January 1 or 2, 379), was the bishop of Caesarea Mazaca in Cappadocia, Asia Minor (modern-day Turkey). He was an influential theologian who supported the Nicene Creed and opposed the heresies of the early Christian church, fighting against both Arianism and the followers of Apollinaris of Laodicea. His ability to balance his theological convictions with his political connections made Basil a powerful advocate for the Nicene position.

In addition to his work as a theologian, Basil was known for his care of the poor and underprivileged. Basil established guidelines for monastic life which focus on community life, liturgical prayer, and manual labor. Together with Pachomius, he is remembered as a father of communal monasticism in Eastern Christianity. He is considered a saint by the traditions of both Eastern and Western Christianity.

Basil, Gregory of Nazianzus, and Gregory of Nyssa are collectively referred to as the Cappadocian Fathers. The Eastern Orthodox Church and Eastern Catholic Churches have given him, together with Gregory of Nazianzus and John Chrysostom, the title of Great Hierarch. He is recognized as a Doctor of the Church in the Roman Catholic Church. He is sometimes referred to by the epithet Ouranophantor (Greek: Οὐρανοφάντωρ), "revealer of heavenly [^481:3]

[^481:3]: Fedwick, P.J. 1981. Basil of Caesarea: Christian, Humanist, Ascetic: A Sixteen-Hundredth Anniversary Symposium. Pontifical Institute of Medieval Studies. https://books.google.ro/books?id=CGUXAAAAIAAJ.

### Date and delivery of Basil's Hexaemeron.

Basil died on the first day of January, 379 A.D., and was born about 329. When or where the nine homilies which compose his _Hexaemeron_ were preached is not known, but from an allusion to his bodily infirmity in the seventh homily and his forgetfulness the next day in Homily VIII we might infer that it was late in life. To all appearances these sermons were taken down and have reached us just as they were delivered to the people, to whose daily life Basil frequently adverts. The sermons were delivered early in the morning before the artisans in the audience went to their work and again at the close of the day and before the evening meal, since Basil sometimes speaks of the approach of darkness surprising him and of its consequently being time to stop.  [^482:1]  One of the surest indications either that the sermons were delivered extemporaneously, or that Basil was repeating with variations to suit the occasion and present audience sermons which he had delivered so often as to have practically memorized, occurs in the eighth homily where he starts to discuss land animals, forgetting that the last day he did not get to birds, but is presently brought to a realization of his omission by the actions of his audience and, after a pause and an apology, makes a fresh start upon birds. The _Hexaemeron_ was highly praised by Basil's contemporaries and was regarded as the best of his works by later Byzantine literary collectors and critics. 

 [^482:1]: Homily I was delivered in the morning, II in the evening; III was in the morning and speaks of a coming evening address. At the close of Homily VII Basil urges his hearers to talk over at their evening meal what they have heard this morning and this evening. If we regard Homily VI as the morning address referred to, we shall have Homily V left to cover an entire day. Homily VI, however, is the longest of the nine. In any case Homily VIII is clearly preached in the morning, and IX at evening. 

### The Hexaemeron of Ambrose

Basil's work, however, was not the first of its kind, as Hippolytus and Origen, at least, are known to have earlier composed similar treatises, and still earlier in the treatise of Theophilus To Autolycus we find a few chapters  [^483:1]  devoted to the six days of creation. In one of his letters Jerome states that 

 [^483:1]: Bk. II, caps. 10-17.

> "Ambrose recently so compiled the _Hexaemeron_ of Origen that he rather followed the views of Hippolytus and Basil."  [^483:2]  

 [^483:2]: _Epistola 65, ad Pamniachium_. Augustine's _De Genesi ad litteram_, which Cassiodorus (Institutes, I, i) esteemed above the commentaries of Basil and Ambrose upon Genesis, is a somewhat similar work, but, after a briefer treatment of the work of creation, continues to comment on the text up to Adam's expulsion from Paradise. 

This Latin work of Ambrose is extant and seems to me to follow Basil very closely. At times the order of presentation is slightly varied and the work of Ambrose is longer, but this is due to its more verbose rhetoric and greater indulgence in Biblical quotation, and not to the introduction of new ideas. The Benedictine editors of Ambrose admit that he has taken a great deal from Basil but deny that he has servilely imitated him.  [^483:3]   
But a striking instance of such servile imitation is seen in Ambrose's duplicating even Basil's mistake in omitting to discuss birds and then apologizing for it, reminding one of the Chinese workman who made all the new dinner plates with a crack and a toothpick stuck in it, like the old broken plate which he had been given as a model. It is true that Ambrose does not first discuss land animals for a page as Basil did, but makes his apology more immediately. The opening words of the eighth sermon in the twelfth chapter of his fifth book are, 

 [^483:3]: Migne, PL, 14, 131-2. The most recent edition of the _Hexaemeron_ of Ambrose is by C. Schenkl. Vienna, 1896. 

> "And after he had remained silent for a moment, again resuming his discourse, he said . . ." 

Then comes his apology, expressed in different terms from Basil's and to the effect that in his previous discourse upon fishes he became so immersed in the depths of the sea as to forget all about birds. Thus the incident which in Basil had every appearance of a natural mistake, in Ambrose has all the earmarks of an affected imitation. It is barely possible, however, that Origen made the original mistake and that Basil and Ambrose have both imitated him in it. On the other hand, we are told that the _Hexaemeron_s of Origen and Basil differed fundamentally in this respect, that Origen indulged to a great extent in allegorical interpretation of the 
Mosaic account of creation  [^484:1]  while Basil declares that he 

 [^484:1]: Fialon, _Etude sur St. Basile_, 1869, p. 296. 

> "takes all in the literal sense," is "not ashamed of the Gospel," and "admits the common sense of the Scriptures."  [^484:2]  

 [^484:2]: Homily IX. 

### Basil medieval influence.

At any rate, Basil's _Hexaemeron_ seems to have supplanted all such previous treatises in Greek, while its western influence is shown not only by Ambrose's imitation of it so soon after its production, but by Latin translations of it by Eustathius Afer in the fifth, and perhaps by Dionysius Exiguus in the sixth century. Medieval manuscripts of it are fairly numerous and sometimes of early date, [^484:3]  

 [^484:3]: For example, in the catalog, published in 1744, of MSS in the then Royal Library at Paris there are listed five copies of Eustathius' Latin translation, dating from the ninth to the fourteenth century - 2200, 4; 1701, i; 1702, i; 1787A, 2; 2633, I; and fifteen copies of the _Hexaemeron_ of Ambrose - 1718; 1702, 2; 1719 to 1727 inclusive; 2387, 4; 2637 and 2638.  
I have not noted what MSS of the _Hexaemerons_ of Basil and Ambrose are found in the British Museum and Bodleian libraries. Some other medieval copies of Basil's in Latin translation are: BN 12134, 9th century Lombard hand; Vendome 122, nth century, fols. I v-60; Soissons 121, I2th century, fol. 97, Eustathius' prologue and a part of his translation; Grenoble 258, 12th cen- tury, fols. 1-45, "Eustathii translatio. . . ."   
The _Hexaemeron_ of Ambrose, since written originally in Latin, is naturally found oftener. The oldest MS is said to be CU _Corpus_ Christi 193, large Lombard script of the 8th century which closely resembles BN 3836. Other MSS are: BN 11624, nth century; BN 12135, 9th century; BN 12136, 12-13th century; BN 13336, nth century; BN 14847, 12th century, fol. 163; BN nouv. acq. 490, 12th century; Vatican 269-273 inclusive, 10-15th centuries; Alenqon 10, 12th century; Vendome 129, 12th century, fols. 48-126; Semur, 10, 12th century; Chartres 63, 10-nth century, fols. 3-46; Orleans 35, 11nth century; Orleans 192, 7th century, part of the first two books only; Amiens fonds Lescalopier 30, 12th century; le Mans 15, nth century; Brussels 1782, loth century; CLM 2549, I2th century; CLM 3728, 10th century; CLM 6258, 10th century; CLM 13079, 12th century; CLM 14399, I2th century; Novara 40, 12th century; and many other MSS of later date in these and other libraries. 

and include an Anglo-Saxon epitome ascribed to Aelfric in the Bodleian Library, Bartholomew of England  [^484:4]  in the thirteenth century quotes 

 [^484:4]: _De proprietatibus rerum_, VIII, 4.

> "Rabanus who uses the words of Basil in the _Hexaemeron_" 

for a description of the empyrean heaven which I have been unable to find in the works of either Rabanus or Basil. Bede, in a similar, though much abbreviated, work of his own, states that while many have said many things concerning the beginning of the Book of Genesis, the chief authorities, so far as he has been able to discover, are Basil of Caesarea, whom Eustathius translated from Greek into Latin, Ambrose of Milan, and Augustine, bishop of Hippo. These works, however, were so long and expensive that only the rich could afford to purchase them and so profound that only the learned could read and understand them. Bede had accordingly been requested to compose a brief rendition of them, which he does partly in his own words, partly in theirs.  [^485:1]  

 [^485:1]: Bede, _Hexaemeron, sive libri quatuor in principium Genesis usque ad nativitatem Isaac et electionem Ismaelis_, in Migne, PL, Qi, 9-100. Bede originally intended to carry his work only to the expulsion of Adam from Paradise, but subsequently added three more books.  

### Science and religion

The general tenor of Basil's treatise may be described Science as follows. He accepts the literal sense of the first chapter religion. of Genesis as a correct account of the universe, and, when he finds Greek philosophy and science in disagreement with the Biblical narrative, inveighs against the futilities and follies and conflicting theories and excessive elaborations of the philosophers. On such occasions the simple statements of Scripture are sufficient for him. 

> "Upon the essence of the heavens we are contented with what Isaiah says. ... In the same way, as concerns the earth, let us resolve not to torment ourselves by trying to find out its essence. ... At all events let us prefer the simplicity of faith to the demonstrations of reason."  [^485:2]  

These three quotations illustrate his attitude at such times. But at all other times he is apt to follow Greek science rather implicitly, accepting without question its hypothesis of four elements and four qualities, and taking all his details about birds, beasts, and fish from the same source. 

 [^485:2]: Homilies I, VIII, and X.

### Scientific curiosity of Basil audience

Moreover, while Basil may affirm that the edification of the church is his sole aim and interest, it is evident that his audience are possessed by a lively scientific curiosity, and that they wish to hear a great deal more about natural phenomena than Isaiah or any other Biblical author has to offer them.

> "What trouble you have given me in my previous discourses," exclaims Basil in his fourth homily, "by asking me why the earth was invisible, why all bodies are naturally endued with color, and why all color comes under the sense of sight? And perhaps my reason did not appear sufficient to you. . . , Perhaps you will ask me new questions." 

Basil gratifies this curiosity concerning the world of nature with many details not mentioned in the Bible but drawn from such works as Aristotle's Meteorology and _History of Animals_. This scientific curiosity displayed by Basil's hearers is the more interesting in that artisans who had to labor for their daily bread appear to have made up a large element in his audience.  [^486:1]  

 [^486:1]: Homily III,1 and 10. 

It is perhaps on their account that Basil often speaks of God as the supreme artisan or artificer or artist,  [^486:2]  or calls their attention to 

 [^486:2]: I,7; III,5 and 10.

"the vast and varied workshop of divine creation,"  [^486:3]  

 [^486:3]: IV,I.

and makes other flattering allusions to arts which support _Life_ or produce enduring work, and to waterways and sea trade.  [^486:4]  

 [^486:4]: I,7; III,5; IV,3,4, and 7; VI,9; VII,6. 

He also seems to have a sincere appreciation of the arts and admiration of beauty, which he twice defines.  [^486:5]  

 [^486:5]: II,7; III, 10. 

### Allusions to amusements

At the risk of digression, it is perhaps worth noting further that Basil's hearers seem to have been very familiar with, not to say fond of, the amusements common in the cities of the Roman Empire. Twice he opens his sermons with allusions to the athletes of the circus and actors of the theater, [^486:6]  apparently as the surest way of quickly catching the attention of his audience, while on a third occasion, in concluding his morning address on what appears to have been a holiday, he remarks that if he had dismissed them earlier, some would have spent the rest of the day gambling with dice, and that 

 [^486:6]: IV.1; VI,1.

"the longer I keep you, the longer you are out of the way of mischief." [^486:7]  

 [^486:7]: VIII,8.

He also alludes to the spinning of tops and to what was apparently the game of push-ball. [^487:1] 

 [^487:1]: Homily V,10; IX,2 
 
### Conflicts with Greek science

Taking up the contents of the _Hexaemeron_ more in detail, we may first note those points upon which Basil supports the statements of the Bible against Greek science and philosophy. He of course insists that the universe was created by God and is not co-existent, much less identical, with Him. [^487:2]  

 [^487:2]: Homily I,3. 

He also denies that the form of the world alone is due to God and that matter is of separate origin.  [^487:3]   

> Nor will he accept the arguments of the philosophers who "would rather lose their tongues" than admit that there is more than one heaven. 

 [^487:3]: Homily II,1.

Basil is ready to believe not merely in a second, but a third heaven, such as the apostle Paul speaks of being rapt to. He regards a plurality of heavens as no more difficult to credit than the seven concentric spheres of the planets, and as much more probable than the philosophic theory of the music of the spheres which he decries as "ingenious frivolity, the untruth of which is evident from the first word." [^487:4]  

 [^487:4]: Homily III,3.

He also defends the statement of Scripture that there are waters above the firmament, not only against the doctrines of ancient astronomy, [^487:5]  but also against 

 [^487:5]: Homily II,4, _et seq_.

> "certain writers in the church," among whom he probably has Origen in mind, who interpret the passage figuratively and assert that the waters stand for "spiritual and incorporeal powers," those above the firmament representing good angels and those below the firmament standing for evil demons. "Let us reject these theories as we would the interpretations of dreams and old-wives' tales."  [^487:6]  

 [^487:6]: Homily III,9.

In connection with Basil's defense of the plurality of the heavens it may be noted that R.H.Charles presents evidence to show "that speculations or definitely formulated views on the plurality of the heavens were rife in the very cradle of Christendom and throughout its entire development," and that "the prevailing view was that of the seven fold division of the heavens,"  [^488:1]  
He fails, however, to discriminate between the doctrine of Greek philosophy that the universe was one, although the circles of the planets are seven, and the plurality of the heavens, which Basil insists that the philosophers deny; and very probably the Jewish and early Christian notions of successive heavens full of angels and spirits developed from the spheres of the planets. Among the various early heresies described by the fathers are also found, of course, many allusions to these seven spheres or heavens. The disciples of Valentinus, for example, according to Irenaeus and Epiphanius, 

 [^488:1]: Charles, The Book of the 'Secrets of Enoch, Introduction, pp. xxxi, xxxix. 

"affirm that these seven heavens are intelligent and speak of them as angels... and declare that Paradise, situated above the third heaven, is a powerful angel." [^488:2]  

 [^488:2]: Irenaeus, I,5; Epiphanius, ed. Petavius 186AB. II,7. 

### Agreement with Greek science.

On the other hand, we may note some points where Basil is in accord with Greek science. 

> He warns his hearers not to "be surprised that the world never falls; it occupies the center of the universe, its natural place."  [^488:3]  

 [^488:3]: Homily I,10.

He advances numerous proofs of the immense size of the sun and moon.  [^488:4]  

 [^488:4]: Homily VI,9-1 1. 

He accepts the hypothesis of four elements but abstains from passing judgment upon the question of a fifth element of which the heavens and celestial bodies may be composed. [^488:5]  

 [^488:5]: Homily I,11. 

He thinks that "it needs not the space of a moment for light to pass through" the ether.  [^488:6]  

 [^488:6]: Homily II,7.

### Qualification of the Scriptural account of creation

Moreover, Basil finds it necessary to qualify some of the statements in the first chapter of Genesis. He interprets the command, "Let the waters under the heaven be gathered together unto one place," to apply only to the sea or ocean, which he contends is one body of water, and not to pools and lakes, [^488:7]  recognizing that otherwise 

 [^488:7]: Homily IV, 2-4. 

"our explanation of the creation of the world may appear contrary to experience, because it is evident that all the waters did not flow together in one place." In this connection he states that "although some authorities think that the Hyrcanian and Caspian Seas are enclosed in their own boundaries, if we are to believe the geographers, they communicate with each other and together discharge themselves into the Great Sea." He speaks of "the vast ocean, so dreaded by navigators, which surrounds the isle of Britain and western Spain." [^489:1]  

 [^489:1]: Homily IV,4.

> Later he contends that "sea water is the source of all the moisture of the earth."  [^489:2]  

 [^489:2]: Homily IV,6. 

He has also to meet the following objection made to the eleventh and twelfth verses of the first chapter of Genesis: "How then, they say, can Scripture describe all the plants of the earth as seed-bearing, when the reed, couch-grass, mint, crocus, garlic, and the flowering rush and countless other species produce no seed? To this we reply that many vegetables have their seminal virtue in the lower part and in the roots." [^489:3]  

 [^489:3]: Homily V.2. 

### The four elements and four qualities.

Basil regards the words of Genesis, "God called the dry land earth," as a recognition of the fact that drought is the primal property of earth, as humidity is of air; cold, of water; and heat, of fire. He adds, however, that "our eyes and senses can find nothing which is completely singular, simple, and pure. Earth is at the same time dry and cold; water, cold and moist; air, moist and warm; fire, warm and dry."  [^489:4]  

 [^489:4]: Homily IV.5.

Indeed, as he has already stated in the previous homily, the mixture of elements in actual objects is even more intricate than this last sentence might seem to indicate. Every element is in every other, and we not only do not perceive with our senses any pure elements but not even any compounds of two elements only. [^489:5]  

 [^489:5]: Homily Ill,4.

### Enthusiasm for nature as God work.

Basil is alive to the absorbing interest of the world of nature and to the marvelous intricacies of natural science. He tells his hearers that as "anyone not knowing a town is taken by the hand and led through it," so he will guide them "through the mysterious marvels of this great city of the universe."  [^489:6]  

 [^489:6]: Homily VI,1.

As he had said in the preceding homily, "A single plant, a blade of grass is sufficient to occupy all your intelligence in the contemplation of the skill which produced it." [^490:1]  

 [^490:1]: Homily V,3. 

> He sees "great wisdom in small things."  [^490:2]  

 [^490:2]: Homily V,9.

Thus by the argument from design he is apt to work back from nature to the Creator, so that his enthusiasm cannot be regarded as purely scientific. Going a step farther than Galen's argument from design, he contends that "not a single thing has been created without reason; not a single thing is useless."  [^490:3]  

 [^490:3]: Homily V,4.

### Sin and nature
 
Basil also cherishes the notion, which we have already found both in pagan and Christian writers, that human sin leaves its stain or has its effect upon nature. The rose was without thorns before the fall of man, and their addition to its beauty serves to remind us that "sorrow is very near to pleasure." [^490:4]   

 [^490:4]: Homily V,6.

### Habits of animals.

Basil discusses the habits of animals largely in order to draw moral lessons from them for human beings and he has several passages in the style supposed to be characteristic of the Physiologus. But he also refers in a number of places to the ability of animals to find remedies with which to cure themselves of ailments and injuries, or to their power of divining the future. The sea-urchin foretells storms; sheep and goats discern danger by instinct alone. The starling eats hemlock and digests it "before its chill can attack the vital parts"; and the quail is able to feed on hellebore. The wounded bear nurses himself, filling his wounds with mullein, an astringent plant; "the fox heals his wounds with droppings from the pine tree"; the tortoise counteracts the venom of the vipers it has eaten by means of the herb marjoram; and "the serpent heals sore eyes by eating fennel." [^490:5]  

 [^490:5]: Homily VII,5; IX,3.

### Marvels of nature

Indeed, far from being led by his acquaintance with Greek science into doubting the marvelous, Basil finds "in nature a thousand reasons for believing in the marvelous."  [^490:6]  He is ready to ascribe astounding powers to animals, and believes, like Pliny, that 

 [^490:6]: Homily VIII,6.

"the greatest vessels, sailing with full sails, are easily stopped by a tiny fish."  [^491:1]  

 [^491:1]: Homily VII,6.

He tells us that nature endowed the lion with such loud and forceful vocal organs "that often much swifter animals are caught by his roaring alone."  [^491:2]   
He also repeats in charming style the familiar story of the halcyon days. The halcyon lays its eggs along the shore in mid-winter when violent winds dash the waves against the land. Yet winds are hushed and waves are calm during the seven days that the halcyon sits, and then, after its young are hatched and in need of food, 

 [^491:2]: Homily  IX,3.

> "God in his munificence grants another seven days to this tiny animal. All sailors know this and call these days halcyon days."  [^491:3]  

 [^491:3]: Homily VIII,5. See also Aristotle, _History of Animals_, V, 8. 

### Spontaneous generation

Like most ancient scientists, Basil believes that some animals are spontaneously generated. "Many birds have no need of union with males to conceive," a circumstance which should make it easy for us to believe in the Virgin birth of Christ.  [^491:4]  

 [^491:4]: Homily VIII,6. 

Grasshoppers and other nameless insects and sometimes frogs and mice are "born from the earth itself," and "mud alone produces eels,"  [^491:5]  a theory not much more amazing than the assertion of modern biologists that eels spawn only in the Mediterranean Sea. Basil states that "in the environs of Thebes in Egypt after abundant rain in hot weather the country is covered with field mice," but without noting that abundant rain in upper Egypt in hot weather would itself be in the nature of a miracle. 

 [^491:5]: Homily IX, 2. 

### Lack of scientific skepticism

Basil is less sceptical than Apollonius of Tyana in regard to the birth of lions and of vipers, repeating unquestioningly the statement that the viper gnaws its way out of its mother's womb, and that the lioness bears only one whelp because it tears her with its claws. [^491:6]  

 [^491:6]: Homily IX,5.

Of purely scientific scepticism there is, indeed, little in the _Hexaemeron_. Basil does, however, question one of the powers ascribed to magicians, and this is his only mention of the magic art. Discussing the immense size of the moon and its great influence upon terrestrial nature, he declares ridiculous the old-wives' tales which have been circulated everywhere that magic incantations "can remove the moon from its place and make it descend to the earth." [^492:1]  

 [^492:1]: Homily  VI,11.

### Sun worship and astrology

Sun worship still existed in Basil's time and he hails the fact that the sun was not created until the fourth day, after both light and vegetation were in existence, as a severe blow to those who reverence the sun as the source of life.  [^492:2]  However, he does 

 [^492:2]: Homily V, 1.

> "not pretend to be able to separate light from the body of the sun."  [^492:3]  

 [^492:3]: Homily VI, 3.

Theophilus in his earlier discussion of creation had stated, perhaps copying Philo Judaeus, that the luminaries were not created until the fourth day, "because God, who possesses foreknowledge, knew the follies of the vain philosophers, that they were going to say, that the things which grow on earth are produced from the heavenly bodies" - which is, indeed, a fundamental hyopthesis of astrology - "so as to exclude God. In order, therefore, that the truth might be obvious, the plants and seeds were produced prior to the heavenly bodies, for what is posterior cannot produce that which is prior." [^492:4]  

 [^492:4] _Ad Autolycum_, II,15.

Basil does not make this point against the rule of inferior creation by the heavenly bodies, but in a succeeding homily he feels it necessary to devote several paragraphs  [^492:5]  to refutation of the "vain science" of casting nativities, which some persons have justified by the words of God concerning sun, moon, and stars in the first chapter of Genesis, "And let them be for signs." 

 [^492:5]: Homily VI,5-7.

Basil questions if it be possible to determine the exact instant of birth, declares that to at- tribute to the constellations and signs of the zodiac the characteristics of animals is to subject them to external influences, and defends human free will in much the usual fashion. He is ready, however, to grant that "the variations of the moon do not take place without exerting great influence upon the organization of animals and of all living things," and that the moon makes "all nature participate in her changes." [^493:1]  

 [^493:1]: Homily VI,10.

### Permanence of species

Basil's utterances concerning the world of nature are not always consistent. In describing the creation of vegetation he asserts that species are unchanging, affirming that "all which sprang from the earth in the first bringing forth is kept the same to our time, thanks to the constant reproduction of kind."  [^493:2]  Yet a few paragraphs later we find him saying, 

 [^493:2]: Homily V, 2.

> "It has been observed that pines, cut down or even submitted to the action of fire, are changed into a forest of oaks."  [^493:3]  

 [^493:3]: Homily V,7. But perhaps he simply means that oaks will grow where pines used to. Tertullian, _De pallio_, cap. 2, dwelling on the law of change, speaks of the washing down of soil from mountains, the alluvial formation by rivers, and of sea-shells on mountain tops as a proof that the whole earth was once covered by water. He seems to have in mind a gradual process of geological evolution rather than Noah's flood, and Sir James Frazer states that Isidore of Seville is the first he knows of the many writers who have appealed "to fossil shells imbedded in remote mountains as witnesses to the truth of the Noachian tradition," - Origines, XIII, 22, cited by J.G.Frazer, _Folk-Lore in the Old Testament_ (1918), I, 159, who cites the passage in Tertullian at PP- 338-9.

Nevertheless in the last homily he again asserts that "nature, once put in motion by divine command, . . . keeps up the succession of kinds through resemblance to the last. Nature always makes a horse succeed to a horse, a lion to a lion, an eagle to an eagle, and preserving each animal by these uninterrupted successions she transmits it to the end of all things. Animals do not see their peculiarities destroyed or effaced by any length of time; their nature, as though it had just been constituted, follows the course of ages forever young."  [^493:4]  

 [^493:4]: Homily IX, 2. 

### Final impression from the Hexaemeron

Concerning Basil in conclusion we may say that while he can scarcely be called much of a scientist, he is a pretty good scientist for a preacher. His knowledge of, and errors concerning, the world of nature will probably compare quite as well with the science of his day as those of most modern sermons will with the science of our days. His occasional flings at Greek philosophy are probably not to be taken too seriously. But what interests us rather more than Basil's attitude is that of his audience, curious concerning nature. Just as it is evident that many of them go to theaters and circuses, or play with dice, despite Basil's denunciation of the immoral songs of the stage and the evils of gambling; just so, we suspect, it was the attractive morsels of Greek astronomy, botany, and zoology which he offered them that induced them to come and listen further to his argument from design and his moral lessons based upon these natural phenomena. Nor were they likely to observe his censure of incantations and nativities more closely than his condemnation of theater and gaming. It would be rash to infer that they always practiced what he preached. By the same token, even if the church fathers had opposed scientific investigation - and it hardly appears that they did - they would probably have been no more successful in checking it than they were in checking the commerce of Constantinople, although "S.Ambrose regards the gains of merchants as for the most part fraudulent, and S.Chrysostom's language has been generally appealed to in a similar sense." [^494:1]  

 [^494:1]: Cunningham, _Christian Opinion on Usury_, p. 9.

## Epiphanius of Salamis

Epiphanius of Salamis (Greek: Ἐπιφάνιος; c. 310–320 – 403) was the bishop of Salamis, Cyprus at the end of the 4th century. He is considered a saint and a Church Father by both the Orthodox and Roman Catholic Churches. He gained a reputation as a strong defender of orthodoxy. He is best known for composing the Panarion, a very large compendium of the heresies up to his own time, full of quotations that are often the only surviving fragments of suppressed texts. According to Ernst Kitzinger, [^494:11] he "seems to have been the first cleric to have taken up the matter of Christian religious images as a major issue", and there has been much controversy over how many of the quotations attributed to him by the Byzantine Iconoclasts were actually by him. Regardless of this he was clearly strongly against some contemporary uses of images in the church.


[^494:11]: E.Kitzinger, Byzantine art in the making: main lines of stylistic development in Mediterranean art, 3rd-7th century (Cambridge, 1977)

### The Medicine Chest of Epiphanius

The same recognition of an interest In nature on the part of his audience and the same appeal to their scientific curiosity, which we have seen in Basil's sermons, is shown by Epiphanius of Cyprus (315-403) writing in 374-375 A.D.  [^494:2]  

 [^494:2]: Twice in the course of the Panarion (Dindorf, I, 280, and II, 428; Petavius, 2D and 404A) he gives the year of the reign of Valentinian and Valens. namely, the eleventh and the twelfth.  The Panarion is an important source of information on the Jewish–Christian gospels, the Gospel of the Ebionites, and the Gospel of the Hebrews. 

He calls his work against heresies the Panarion, or "Medicine Chest," his idea being to provide antidotes and healing herbs in the form of salubrious doctrine against the venom of heretics whose enigmas he compares to the bites of serpents or wild beasts. This metaphor is more or less adhered to throughout the work, and particular heresies are compared to the asp, basilisk, dipsas,  [^494:3]  

 [^494:3]: Lucian's _De dipsadibus_ will be recalled; see also Pliny, NH, XXIII, 80; Lucan, _Pharsalia_, IX, 719.

buprestis,  [^494:4]  

 [^494:4]: Pliny, NH, XXIII,18; XXX,10. 

lizard, dog-fish or shark, mole, centipede, scorpion, and various vipers. We are further told of substances that drive away serpents, such as the herbs dictamnon, abrotonum, and lihanotis, the gum storax,  [^495:1]  and the stone gagates. 

 [^495:1]: Pliny, NH, XXV, 53; XXI, 92; XIX, 62; XII, 40 and 55.

As his authorities in such matters Epiphanius states that he uses Nicander for the natures of beasts and reptiles, and for roots and plants Dioscorides, Pamphilus, Mithridates the king, Callisthenes and Philo, lolaos the Bithynian, Heracleides of Tarentum, and a number of other names.  [^495:2]  

 [^495:2]: Dindorf , II, 450; Petavius, 422C. 

### Gems in the high priest's breastplate

If in his Panarion Epiphanius makes use of ancient botany, medicine, and zoology for purposes of comparison, in his treatise on the twelve gems in the breastplate of the Hebrew high priest  [^495:3]  he perhaps gives an excuse and sets the fashion for the Christian medieval _Lapidaries_. 

 [^495:3]: _Liber de XII gemmis rationalis summi sacerdotis Hebraeorum_, published in Dindorf's edition of the Opera of Epiphanius, vol. IV, pp. 141-24S, with the preface and notes of Fogginius, and both the Latin and  Greek versions. 

This work was probably composed after the Panarion, and in the opinion of Fogginius even later than 392 A.D.  [^495:4]  This treatise probably was better known in the middle ages than the Paimrion, since the fullest version of it extant is the old Latin one, while the Greek text which has survived seems only a very brief epitome. The Greek version, however, embodies a good deal of what is said concerning the gems themselves and their virtues, but omits entirely the long effort to identify each of the twelve stones with one of the twelve tribes of Israel, which is left unfinished even in the Latin version. Epiphanius shows himself rather chary in regard to such virtues attributed to gems as to calm storms, make men pacific, and confer the power of divination. 

 [^495:4]: _Liber de XII gemmis rationalis summi sacerdotis Hebraeorum_, 160-62.

He does not go so far as to omit them entirely, but he usually qualifies them as the assertion of "those who construct fables" or "those who believe fables." It is without any such qualification, however, that he declares that the topaz,  [^495:5]  when ground on a physician's grindstone, although red itself, emits a white milky fluid, and, moreover, that as many vessels as one wishes may be filled with this fluid without changing the appearance or shape or lessening the weight of the stone. Skilled physicians also attribute to this liquid a healing effect in eye troubles, in hydrophobia, and in the case of those who have gone mad from eating grape-fish. 

 [^495:5]: _Liber de XII gemmis rationalis summi sacerdotis Hebraeorum_, P. 174

### Some other gems

Some Epiphanius mentions a few other gems than those in the high priest's breastplate. Among these is the stone hyacinth   [^496:1]  which, when placed upon live coals, extinguishes them without injury to itself and which is also beneficial to women in childbirth, and drives away phantasms. 

 [^496:1]: _Liber de XII gemmis rationalis summi sacerdotis Hebraeorum_, Pp. 190-91.

Certain varieties of it are found in the north among the barbarous Scythians. The gems lie at the bottom of a deep valley which is inaccessible to men because walled in completely by mountains, and moreover from the summits one cannot see into the valley because of a dark mist which covers it. How men ever became cognizant of the fact that there are gems there may well be wondered but is a point which Epiphanius does not take into consideration. He simply tells us that when men are sent to obtain some of these stones, they skin sheep and hurl the carcasses into the valley where some of the gems adhere to the flesh. The odor of the raw meat then attracts the eagles, whose keener sight is perhaps able to penetrate the mist, although Epiphanius does not say so, and they carry the carrion to their nests in the mountains. The men watch where the eagles have taken the meat and go there and find the gems which have been brought out with it. In the middle ages we find this same story in a slightly different form told of Alexander the Great on his expedition to India. Epiphanius has one thing to tell of India himself in connection with gems, which is that a temple of Father Liber (Bacchus) is located there which is said to have three hundred and sixty-five steps, - all of sapphire.  [^496:2]  

 [^496:2]: _Liber de XII gemmis rationalis summi sacerdotis Hebraeorum_, 184. 

## Physiologus 

Bestiary, literary genre in the European Middle Ages consisting of a collection of stories, each based on a description of certain qualities of an animal, plant, or even stone. The stories presented Christian allegories for moral and religious instruction and admonition. [^18:0]

 [^18:0]: Greek Physiologus, a text compiled by an unknown author before the middle of the 2nd century ad. It consists of stories based on the “facts” of natural science as accepted by someone called Physiologus (Latin: “Naturalist”), about whom nothing further is known, and from the compiler’s own religious ideas. [Bestiaries](https://www.britannica.com/art/bestiary-medieval-literary-genre)

### The Physiologus origin

The problem of an early Christian work entitled _Physiologus_ is no easy one, although much has been written concerning it  [^497:1]  and more has been taken for granted.  

 [^497:1]: Pitra, _Spicilegium Solesmense_, Paris, 1855, III, xlvii-Ixxx. K. Ahrens, _Zur Geschichte des sogenannten Physiologus_, 185. M.F.Mann, _Bestieire Divin_ de Guillaume Le Clerc. Heilbronn, 1888, pp. 16-33, “Entstehung des Physiologus und seine Entwicklung im Abendlande.” F.Lauchert, _Geschichte des Physioloaus_, Strassburg, 1889. E.Peters, _Der griechische Phystologus und seine orientalischen &Uuml;ebersetzungen_, Berlin, 1898. M. Goldstaub, _Der Physiologus und seine Weiterbildung, besonders in der lateinischen und in der byzantinischen Litieratur_, in _Philologus_, Suppl. Bd. VIII (1898-1901), 337-404. Also in Verhandl. d. 41 Versammlung deutscher Philologen u. Schulmänner in München, Leipzig (1892), pp. 212-21. V. Schultze, _Der Physiologus in der kirchlichen Kunst des Mittelalters_, in Christliches Kunstblatt, XXXIX (1897), 49-55. J. Strzygowski, Der Bilderkreis des griechischen Physiologus, in Byz. Zeitsch. Ergänzungsheft, I (1899). E. P. Evans, Animal Symbolism in Ecclesiastical Architecture, 1896, is disappointing, being mainly compiled from secondary sources and having little to say on ecclesiastical architecture.

For instance, one often meets such wild and sweeping statement as that "the name Physiologus" was "given to a cyclopedia of what was known and imagined about earth, sea, sky, birds, beasts, and fishes, which for a thousand years was the authoritative source of information on these matters and was translated into every European tongue." [^497:2]  

 [^497:2]: "EB, IIth ed. “Arthropoda.”

My later treatment of medieval science will make patent the inaccuracy of such a statement. But to return to the problem of the origin of Physiologus. The original Greek text,  [^497:3]  which some would put back in the first half of the second century of our era, if it ever existed, is now lost, and its previous existence and character are inferred from numerous apparent citations of it, possible extracts from it, and what are taken to be imitations, abbreviations, amplifications, adaptations, and translations of it in other languages and of later date. 

 [^497:3]: Lauchert (1889), pp. 229-79, attempts a critical edition of the Greek text.
 
Thus we have versions or fragments in Armenian,  [^497:4]   

 [^497:4]: Pitra (1855), III, 374-90; French translation in Cahier, _Nouveaux mélanges_ (1874), I, 117, et seq.

Syriac,  [^497:5]  

 [^497:5]: O.G.Tychsen, _Physiologus Syrus_, 1795; from an incomplete Vatican MS. Land, _Otia Syriaca_, Pp. 31, et seq., or in _Anecdota Syriaca_, IV, 115, et seq., gives the complete text with a Latin translation.

Ethiopian  [^498:1]  

 [^498:1]: Hommel, _Die aethiopische Uebersetzung des Physiologus_, Leipzig, 1877. A bit of it was translated by Pitra (1855), III, 416-7. 

and Arabic;  [^498:2]  

 [^498:2]: Land, _Otia Syriaca_, p. 137, et seq., with Latin translation. A fragment in Pitra (1855), III, 535. 

a Greek text from medieval manuscripts, mostly of late date;  [^498:3]  

 [^498:3]: Pitra (1855), III, 338-73. used MSS from the 13th to 15th century. The earliest known illuminated copies are of 1100 A. D. and later: see Dalton, _Byzantine Art and Archaeology_, Oxford, 1911, pp. 481-2.

various Latin versions in numerous manuscripts from the eighth century on;  [^498:4]  

 [^498:4]: The oldest Latin MSS seem to be two of the 8th and 9th centuries at Berne. Edited by Mai, _Classici auctores_, Rome, 1835, VII, 585-96, and more completely by Pitra (1855), III, 418; also by G. Heider, in _Archiv f. Kunde &ouml;sterreich. Geschichtsquellen_, Vienna, 1850, II, 545; Cahier et Martin, _Melanges d'archeologie_, Paris, II (1851), 85fif., Ill (1853), 203ff., IV (1856), 55fif. Cahier, _Nouveaux melanges_ (1874), p, 106ff.  
Mann (1888), pp. 37-73, prints the Latin text which he regards as William le Clerc's source from Royal 2-C-XII, and gives a list of other MSS of Latin Bestiaries in English libraries.  
Other medieval Latin Bestiaries have been printed in the works of Hildebert of Tours or Le Mans (Migne, PL, 171, 1217-24: really this poem concerning only twelve animals is by Theobald, who was perhaps abbot at Monte Cassino, 1022-T035, and it was printed  
under the name of Theobald before 1500, - see the volume numbered lA. 12367 in the British Museum and entitled, _Phisiologus Theobaldi Episcopi de naturis duodecim animalium_. Indeed, it was printed at least nine times under his name, - see Hain, 15467-75): and in the works of Hugh of St. Victor (Migne, PL, '177, 9-164, _De bestiis et aliis rebus libri quatuor_). Both of these versions occur in numerous MSS, as does a third version which opens with citation of the remark of Jacob in blessing his sons, "Judah is a lion's whelp." The author then cites _Physiologus_ as usual concerning the three natures of the lion. See Wolfenb&uuml;ttel 4435, 11th century, fols. 159-68V, Liber bestiarum. "De leone rege bestiarum et animalium (est) etenim iacob benedicens iudam ait Catulus leonis iuda. De leone. Leo tres naturas habet." Laud. Misc. 247, I2th century, fol. 140-, . . . caps. 36, praevia tabula . . . Tit. "De tribus naturis leonis." Incip. "Bestiarium seu animalium regis ; etenim Jacob benedicens filium suum Udam ait Catulus leonis Judas filius meus quis suscitabit eum ; Fisiolo- gus dicit, Tres res naturales habere leonem. . . ." Library of Dukes of Burgundy 10074, loth century, "Etenim Jacob benedi- cens." CLM 19648, 15th century, fols. 180-95, "Igitur Jacob bene- dicens." CLM 237S7, 15th century, fols. 12-20, "Igitur Jacob benedicens." CU Trinity 884, 13th century in a fine hand, with 107 English miniatures, fol. 89-, "Et enim iacob benedicens filium suum iudam ait catulus leonis est iudas filius meus"; this MS ends imperfectly. 

in Old High German a prose translation of about 1000 A.D. and a poetical version later in the same language;  [^498:5]  

 [^498:5]: Printed by Lauchert (1889), pp. 280-90. 

and Bestiaries such as those of Philip of Thaon  [^498:6]  

 [^498:6]: Max F. Mann, _Der Physiologus des Philipp von Thaon und seine Quellen_, Halle, 1884, 53 pp. 

and William the Clerk  [^499:1]  

 [^499:1]: Mann, _Bestiaire Divin_ de Guillaume Le Clerc, Heilbronn, 1888, in Franz&ouml;sische Studien, VI, 2, pp. 201-306. Most recent edition by Robert, Leipzig, 1890. 

in the Romance languages  [^499:2]  

 [^499:2]: Besides the two foregoing see Goldstaub und Wendriner, _Ein toscvenes. Bestiarius_, Halle, 1892, Magliabech. IV, 63, 13th century, mutilated, 53 fols., bestiario moralizato, in Italian prose. E. Monaci, _Rendiconti dell' Accad. dei Lincei, Class e di science morali, storiche e filol_, vol. V, fasc. 10 and 12, has edited a Bestiario in 64 sonetti on as many animals from a private MS at "Gubbio neir archivio degli avvocati Pietro e Oderisi Lucarelli," MS 25, fols. 112-27. See also M. Carver and K. McKenzie, _Il Bestiario Toscano_ secondo la lesione dei codice di Parigi e di Roma, in _Studi romanzi_, Rome, 1912; Mc-Kenzie, Unpublished Manuscripts of Italian Bestiaries, in _Modern Language Publications_, XX (1905), 2; and Carver, "Some Supplementary Italian Bestiary Chapters," in _Romanic Review_, XI (1920), 308-27. 

and other vernaculars.  [^499:3]  

 [^499:3]: For instance, A. S. Cook, _The Old English Elene, Phoenix, and Physiologus_, Yale University Press, 364 pp., 1919. 

The _Physiologus_ has been thought to have originated in Alexandria because of its use of the Egyptian names for the months and because Clement of Alexandria and Origen are supposed to have made use of it. But it is difficult to determine whether the church fathers drew passages concerning animals and nature from some such work or whether it was a collection of passages from their writings upon such themes. Ahrens, who thought he found the original form of the work in a Syriac _Book of the Things of Nature_,  [^499:4]  regarded Origen as its author. 

 [^499:4]: K.Ahrens, Das "_Buch der Naturgegenstdnde_," 1892. 

In a medical manuscript at Vienna is a _Physiologus_ in Greek ascribed to Epiphanius of Cyprus,  [^499:5]  

 [^499:5]: Cod. Vind. Med. 29, τοῦ ἅγιου ᾿Επιφανίου ἐπισκόπου Κύπρου περὶ τῆς λέξεως πάντων τῶν ζώων φυσιολόγος. toú ágiou ᾿Epifaníou episkópou Kýprou perí tís léxeos pánton tón zóon fysiológos. In the edition of Ponce de Leon, Rome, 1587, there are twenty animals described, and the symbolic interpretation is very short compared to later versions. Heider (1850), p. 543, regarded this as the oldest version and as extant in complete form. 

of whom we have just been treating, while we hear that Pope Gelasius at a synod of 496 condemned as apocryphal a _Physiologus_ which was written by heretics and ascribed to Ambrose,  [^499:6]  who so closely duplicated the _Hexaemeron_ of Basil.

 [^499:6]: Mansi, _Concil_, VIII, 151, "Liber _Physiologus_ ab hereticis conscriptus et beati Ambrosii nomine presignatus apocryphus." 

 A work on the natures of animals is also attributed to John Chrysostom.  [^499:7]  

 [^499:7]: Hejder (1850), II, 541-82, "_Physiologus_ nach einer Handschrift des XI Jahrhunderts": the text opens at p. 552, "Incipiunt Dicta Johannis Chrysostomi de naturis bestiarum." Lauchert used another MS, Vienna 303, 14th century, fol. 124V-, which was considerably different and was furthermore combined with the Physiologus of Theobald. An earlier MS than either of the foregoing is CLM 19417, 9th century, fols. 29-71, Liber Sancti Johannis episcopi regiae urbis Constantinopoli . . . Crisestomi quem de naturis animalium ordinavit. Another Vienna MS is 251I, 14th century, fols. 135-40, "Incipiunt dicta Johannis Chrysostomi de naturis animalium et primo de leone .../... Sic erit et scriba doctus in regno celorum qui profert de thesauro suo noua et uetera. Expliciunt dicta Johannis Crisostomi" A Paris MS of the same 1s BN 2780, 13th century, 14, Sancti Ioannis Chrysostomi liber qui physiologus appellatur.

I am not sure whether a Physiolog MS ascribed to John the Scot in a tenth century Latin manuscript is the same work.  [^500:1]  

 [^500:1]: Additional 11,035, Johannis Scottigenae. Phisiologiae liber. In the same MS are Macrobius' _Dream of Scipio_ and the poems of Prudentius.

### Does the title apply to any one particular treatise 

The _Physiologus_ is commonly described as a symbolic bestiary, in which the characteristics and properties of animals are accompanied by Christian allegories and instruction. Some have almost gone so far as to hold that any passages of this sort are evidence of an author's having employed the _Physiologus_, which some have held influenced the middle ages more than any other book except the Bible. But Pitra's point is well taken that the _Physiologus_ is one thing and the allegorical interpretation thereof another.  
In the case of the discordant versions or fragments which he gathered and published from different manuscripts, centuries, and languages, he noted one common feature, that the allegorical interpretation was sharply separated from the extracts from _Physiologus_ and sometimes omitted entirely. This is what one would naturally expect since a _Physiologus_ is a natural scientist on whose statements concerning this or that the allegorical interpretation is presumably based and added thereto.  
But this suggests another difficulty in identifying _Physiologus_ as a single work. The abbreviations for the word in medieval manuscripts are very easily confused with those for philosophers or phisici (physical scientists), and just as medieval writers often cite what the philosophers say or the phisici say without having reference to any particular book, so may they not cite what physiologi or even _Physiologus_ says without having any particular writer in mind? In the _De bestiis_ ascribed to Hugh of St. Victor of the twelfth century physici are cited  [^501:1]  as well as Physiologiis. 

 [^501:1]: _De hestiis et aliis rebus_, II, 1 (Migne, PL 177, 57). "Physici denique dicunt quinque naturales res sive naturas habere leonem. . . ." 

When Albertus Magnus states in the thirteenth century in his work on minerals that the physiologi have assigned very different causes for the marvelous occult virtue in stones, he evidently simply alludes to the opinions of scientists in general and has no such work or works as the so-called _Physiologus_ in mind.  [^501:2]  

 [^501:2]: Mineral., II, i, i (ed. Borgnet, V, 24). 

This is also clearly the case in a fragment from the introduction to a Latin translation from the Arabic of some treatise on the astrolabe, in which we find phisiologi cited as astronomical authorities. [^501:3]  

 [^501:3]: Bubnov ( 1899) , p.372. 

Furthermore, even in works which deal with the natures of animals and which either have the word Physiologus in their titles or cite it now and then in the course of their texts, there exists such diversity that it becomes fairly evident not only that it is impossible to deduce from them the list of animals treated in the original Physiologiis or the details which it gave concerning each, but also that it is highly probable that the title _Physiologus_ has been applied to different treatises which did not necessarily have a common origin. Or at least the greatest liberties were taken with the original text and title, [^501:4] so that the word _Physiologus_ came to apply less to any particular book, author, or authority than to almost any treatment of animals in a certain style. 

 [^501:4]: Thus even Lauchert (1899), p-105, admits that Bartholomew of England, the thirteenth century- Latin encyclopedist, cites Physiologus for much which does not come from _Physiologus_.

### And to what sort of a treatise

But of what style? It has too often been assumed that theology dominated all medieval thought and that natural science was employed only for purposes of religious symholism. Of this general assumption the _Physiologus_ has been seized upon as an apt illustration and it has been represented as a symbolic bestiary which influenced the middle ages more than any other book except the Bible  [^501:5]  and whose allegories accounted for the animal sculpture of the Gothic cathedrals and the strange or familiar beasts in the borders of the Bayeux Tapestry, the margins of illuminated manuscripts, and so on and so forth. 

 [^501:5]: Goldstaub (1899-1901), p. 341. 

### Medieval art shows almost no symbolic influence of the Physiologus

The more recent scientific study of medieval art has largely dissipated this latter notion. It has become evident that in the main medieval men represented animals in art because they were fond of animals, not because they were fond of allegories. Their art was natural, not symbolic. They were, says Male, "craftsmen who delighted in nature for its own sake, sometimes lovingly copying the living forms, sometimes playing with them, combining and contorting them as they were led by their own caprice." St. Bernard, although "the prince of allegorists," saw no sense in the animal sculptures in Romanesque cloisters and in- veighed against them. In short, with the exception of the symbols of the four evangelists, "there are few cases in which it is permissible to assign symbolic meaning to animal forms," and it is "evident that the fauna and flora of medieval art, natural or fantastic, have in most cases a value that is purely decorative." "To sum up," concludes Male, "we are of the opinion that the Bestiaries of which we hear so much from the archaeologists had no real influence on art until their substance passed into Honorius of Autun's bopk (_Speculum ecclesiae_, c.1090-1120) and from that book into sermons. I have searched in vain (with but two ex- ceptions) for representations of the hedgehog, beaver, tiger, and other animals which figure in the Bestiaries but which are not mentioned by Honorius."  [^502:1]  

 [^502:1]: This and the preceding quotations in the paragraph are from Mâle (1913), pp. 48, 35, 49. 45. 

### Physiologus was more natural scientist than allegorist 

These assertions concerning medieval art hold true also to a large extent of medieval literature and medieval science, although they were perhaps less natural and original than it and more dependent on past tradition and authority. But medieval men, as we shall see, studied nature from scientific curiosity and not in search for spiritual allegories, and even Goldstaub recognizes that by the thirteenth century the scientific zoology of Aristotle submerged that of the _Physiologus_ in writers like Thomas of Cantimpre and Albertus Magnus who, although they may still embody portions of the _Physiologus_, divest it of its characteristic religious elements.  [^503:1]  

 [^503:1]: Goldstaub (1899-1901), pp. 350-1. The same statement could be made with equal truth of Vincent of Beauvais and Bartholomew of England.  

But were its characteristic elements ever religious? Were they not always scientific or pseudo-scientific? Ahrens holds that the title was taken from Aristotle in the first place, and that Pliny was the chief source for the contents. The allegories do not appear in such early texts as the Syriac version or the fragments preserved in the Latin Glossary of Ansileubus. Not even the introductory scriptural texts appear in the Greek version ascribed to Epiphanius. Moreover, in the Bestiaries where the allegorical applications are included, it is for the natures of the animals, the supposedly scientific facts on which the symbolism is based, and for these alone that _Physiologus_ is cited in the text. Thus the symbolism would appear to be somewhat adventitious, while the pseudo-science is constant. It is obvious that the allegorical applications cannot do with- out the supposed facts concerning animals; on the other hand, the supposedly scientific information can and does frequently dispense with the allegories. We do not know who was responsible for the allegorical interpretations in the first instance. Hommel would carry the origin of their symbolism back of the Christian era to the animal worship of Persia, India, and Egypt.  [^503:2]  

 [^503:2]: Hommel (1877), pp. xii, xv.

But we are assured over and over again that Natural Scientist or _Physiologus_ vouches for the statements concerning the natures of animals. Thus the symbolic significance of the literature that has been grouped under the title _Physiologus_ has been exaggerated, while the respect for and interest in natural science to which it testifies have too often been lost sight of. 




