
# Chapter XXVI 

## Pseudo-literature in natural science of the early middle ages 

### General character. 

A class of writings which seems to have been very characteristic of the waning culture of the declining Roman Empire and the scanty erudition of the early medieval period were the brief epitomes of, or disorderly collections of fragments from, the writers of the classical period. Such works often passed under the name of some famous author of the previous period and sometimes are more or less based upon his writings. Most of the works in the field of natural science are of such derivative or pseudo-authorship: the Medicine of the Pseudo-Pliny, the Herbarium of the Pseudo-Apuleius, the geographical work ascribed to Aethicus, the _Geoponica_, the treatises on herbs attributed to Macer and Dioscorides. Indeed, the whole textual history of the latter's _De materia medica_ is so full of vicissitudes and uncertainties that I have postponed its treatment until this chapter. The names of the actual compilers or abbreviators of these works are usually unknown and it is also usually impossible to date them with any approach to accuracy.  
Roughly speaking of them as a whole, they may be said to have gradually taken on their present form at almost any time between the third and tenth centuries. In the case of these works of natural science at least, it is not quite fair to class them all as brief epitomes or disorderly collections. In some we see an obvious attempt to rearrange the old materials in a form more convenient for present use. In others to the stage of abbreviation from ancient authors has succeeded another stage of later additions from other sources. 

### _Medicine of Pliny_
 
The _Medicina_, or _Art of Medicine_, of the Pseudo-Pliny  [^595:1] consists of three books in which medical passages, drawn from Pliny's Natural History, are rearranged according to diseases instead of, as in the genuine Pliny, by simples. The first two books deal with diseases of the human body in descending order from top to toe and from headache to gout, a favorite arrangement throughout the course of medieval medicine. The last book then considers afflictions which are not necessarily connected with any particular part of the body, such as wounds and fevers. Thus this compilation attests Pliny's medieval influence and the practical use made of his work, while it of course continues much of his medical magic and superstition. The compiler's rearrangement is an essential one, if the medical recommendations of the Natural History were to be made available for ready reference. In this case, therefore, the epitomizer has rather improved upon than disordered the arrangement of the original. 

 [^595:1]:  _Plinii Secundi lunioris de medicina libri tres_, ed. V.Rose, Lipsiae, 1875. V.Rose, "_Ueber die  Medicina_ Plinii," in _Hermes_, VIII (1874) 19-66. 

This compilation is believed to have been used by Marcellus Empiricus, and a Letter of Pliniiis Secundus to his friends about medicine, which Marcellus gives along with other medical epistles, is thought to be the preface of the abbreviator, who in that case depicts himself as composing his volume so that his friends and himself when traveling may avoid the payment of exorbitant fees asked by strange physicians. If we can regard everything in the work of Marcellus as we have it as having been written by 400, the _Medicine of Pliny_ must have been written during the declining Roman Empire. The manuscripts used by Rose in his edition were of the tenth and twelfth centuries. There is also a later version of the _Medicine of Pliny_ in five books  [^596:1] of which the two last are entirely new additions, the fifth being an extract from the old Latin translation of Alexander of Tralles. And in the first three books the earlier Pseudo-Pliny has been worked over with additions. 

 [^596:1]: C._Plnii Secundi Medicina_, ed. Thomas Pighinuccius, Rome, 1500.

The Pseudo-Pliny is also embodied with alterations and accompanied by some prayers and incantations in a tenth century manuscript at St. Gall.  [^596:2] 

 [^596:2]: Codex St. Gall 751; described by V. Rose, _Hermes_, VIII, 48-55; Anecdota II, 106.

## _Herbarium_ of Apuleius

Several works besides the six commonly regarded as genuine  [^596:3] were attributed to Apuleius in the middle ages,

 [^596:3]: For the list of his six genuine works see above "Stilistic reason...".
 
grammatical  [^596:4] 

 [^596:4]: _De nota aspirations_ and _De diphthongis_, ed. Osann, Darmstadt, 1826, with _De orthographia_, a forgery by a sixteenth century humanist.

and rhetorical  [^596:5] 

 [^596:5]: Περὶ ἑρμηνείας, sometimes printed as the third book of the _De dogmate Platonis_. Some scholars, however, regard it as genuine, and there are a number of MSS of it from the 9th, 10th, and 11th centuries. See Schanz (1905), 127-8.

treatises, the Hermetic _Asclepius_,  [^596:6] 

 [^596:6]: See above Poimandres and the Hermetic Corpus.

a treatise on physiognomy,  [^596:7] 

 [^596:7]: See Schanz (1905), 139-40.

and the very widespread _Sphere of Life and Death_ , of which we shall treat in another chapter.  [^596:8] 

 [^596:8]: See below Spheres of Life... Schanz fails to mention it among the apocryphal works of Apuleius.

We shall now consider the _Herbarium of Apuleius_,  [^596:9] the one of his spurious works, which has most to do with the world of nature, and, with the exception of the brief Sphere, the one which occurs most often in the manuscripts. 

 [^596:9]: H.Kobert, _De Pseudo-Apulei herbarum medicaminibus_, Bayreuth, 1888. Schanz (1905) 138, mentions only continental MSS, although there are numerous MSS of it in the British Museum and Bodleian libraries, some of which have been used and others described by O. Cockayne in his edition of the _Herbarium_ and the other treatises accompanying it in his _Leechdoms, Wortcunnina, and Starcraft of Early England_, Vol I (1864) in RS XXXV. Nor does Schanz note Cockayne's book.

The _Herbarium_ was first printed about 1480 by the physician of Pope Sixtus IV from a manuscript at Monte Cassino, and then, after various other editions, was included in 1547 in the collection of ancient Latin medical writers issued by the Aldine Press. We are told, however, that with the close of the fifteenth century the Apuleius began to be superseded by German herbals. The medieval manuscripts of the Herharimn are often noteworthy for their illuminations of the herbs in vivid colors. Those of the mandragora root are especially interesting, showing it as a man standing on the back of a dog or a human form with leaves growing on the head and led by a dog chained to his waist,  [^597:1] 

 [^597:1]: See Sloane 1975, a vellum MS of the 12th or early 13th century written in fine large letters and beautifully illuminated; Ashmole 1431, end of 11th century, and 1462, 13th century, fol. 45r. Harleian 4986, Apuleii Platonici de medicamentis cum figuris pictis, is another early illuminated English MS. Cockayne I, Ixxxii, does not date it, but the MSS catalogue lists it as tenth century. In CU Trinity 1152, 14th century, James (III, 162-3) estimates the number of colored drawings as between 800 and 1000; he describes only a few. Singer (1921) reproduces a number of such illuminations from MSS of the _Herbarium_ and of Dioscorides. 

The oldest manuscripts are of the sixth century, and there are some in Anglo-Saxon, but as one would expect, the work underwent many additions and alterations, and different manuscripts of it vary considerably. The author is usually spoken of as Apuleius the Platonist and is sometimes said to have received his work from the centaur Chiron, the master of Achilles, and from Esculapius.  [^597:2]

 [^597:2]: Lucca 236, 9-10th century, "_Herbarium_ Apuleii Platonici quem accepit a Chironi magistro Achillis et ab Escolapio explicit feliciter." In Cotton Vitellius C-III, early 11th century, in Anglo-Saxon, although the title reads, "The _Herbarium_ of Apuleius the Platonist which he received from Esculapius and Chiron the centaur, the master of Achilles," a full page painting shows Plato and Chiron receiving the volume from Aesculapius (Cockayne, I, Ixxxviii). And Sloane 1975 and Harleian 1585 speak of the _Herbarium_ as "Liber Platonis Apoliensis." In a 15th century MS (Rawlinson C- 328, fol. 113V-, Incipit de herbis Galieni Apolei et Ciceronis) Galen and Cicero, who perhaps replace Chiron and Aesculapius, are associated with Apuleius as authors. 
 
### Specimens of its occult science.

In the _Herbarium_ the plants are listed and described Specimens and their virtues, especially medicinal, stated. Usually the occult names for each herb in several languages or regions are science, given - Latin, Greek, Punic, Biblical (by the Prophets), Egyptian, Syrian, Gallic, Dacian, Spanish, Phrygian, Tuscan. By no means all of these are listed in every case, however. The virtues of the herbs, often operate in an occult manner, or procedure suggestive of magic is involved in collecting or applying them. Often diseases are cured merely by holding an herb in the hand, wearing it with a string about the neck, or placing it behind one ear, or wearing it in a ring. Lunatics, for example, are treated by binding an herb about the neck with red cloth when the moon is waxing in the sign of the bull or the first part of the scorpion.  
Not only does observance of astrology assist the medicinal application of herbs; plants are in turn of assistance in the pursuit of astrology. To learn under the rule of what star you are, be in a state of purity, pluck the herb Montaster, keep it in a bit of clean linen until you find a whole grain of wheat in a loaf of bread, then place this with the herb under your pillow and pray to the seven planets to reveal your guardian star to you in your sleep. Indeed prayers and incantations are frequently employed and in one case must be repeated nine times. Sometimes the herb itself is addressed, as in the conjuration, 

> "Herb Erystion, I implore you to aid me and cheerfully afford me all your virtues and cure and make whole all those ills which Aesculapius and Chiron the centaur, masters of medicine, healed by means of you." 

Sometimes the earth is conjured as in the prayer beginning, "Holy goddess Earth." Such prayers are scarcely consonant with Christianity and in some manuscripts have been omitted and replaced by the Lord's Prayer or other Christian forms, or left in with their wording shghtly ahered to avoid paganism.  [^598:1] 

 [^598:1]: Daremberg (1853), 11-12, said that the pagan incantations were preserved intact in a number of MSS at Oxford and Cambridge. Conjurations of herbs are not limited to the Pseudo-Apuleius in medieval MSS but sometimes occur singly as in Perugia 736, 13th century, where at fol. 267 a 14th century hand has added a passage in Latin which may be translated: "In the name of Christ, Amen. I conjure you, herb, that I may conquer by lord Peter etc. by moon and stars etc. and may you conquer all my enemies, pontiff and priests and all laymen and all women and all lawyers who are against me etc." In Sloane 1571, 15th century, fols. 1-6, at the close of fragments of a Latin-English dictionary of herbs is a Latin prayer entitled, _Benedictio omnium herbarum_. 

Personal purity and clean clothing are often enjoined upon those gathering the herbs and such instructions are added as to mark the circle about the plant with gold, silver, ivory, the tooth of a wild boar, and the horn of a bull, or to fill the hole with honeyed fruits. Some herbs protect their bearers from all serpents or even from all evils. Others, like asparagus if you use a dry root of it to sprinkle the patient with spring water, break the spell of witchcraft. Asparagus is also beneficial for toothache and wonderfully relieves a tumor or bladder trouble, if it is boiled in water and drunk by the patient fasting for seven days and also used in bathing for a number of days. But one must be careful not to go out in the cold during this time nor to take cold drinks.  [^599:1] 

 [^599:1]: The above passages are from Sloane 1975 and the edition of 1547.

### Precantation of all herbs

In some manuscripts a "Precantation of all herbs" is placed at the beginning of the treatise.  [^599:2]   
It prescribes such procedure as holding a mirror over the herb before plucking it before sunrise under a waning moon. The person plucking the herb and uttering the incantation must be barefoot, unguarded, chaste, and wear no ring. The plant is adjured not only "by the living God" and "the holy name of God, Sabaoth," but also by Seia, the Roman goddess of sowing, and by "GS," which presumably stands for Gaia Seia, an expression which is once written out in full. Some meaningless words are also repeated. 

 [^599:2]: Ashmole 1431, 11th century, fol. 3r, "In nomine domini incipit herboralium apuleii platonis quod accepit ascolapio et chirone centauro magistro. Lege feliciter. Precantatio omnium herbarum ad singulas curas." CU Trinity 1152, 14th century, fol. i. Gonville and Caius 345, 14th century, fol. 89v. 

### Other treatises accompanying the _Herbarium_

The _Herbarium_ is often accompanied in the manuscripts by other treatises on herbs ascribed to Dioscorides and Macer, of which we shall speak presently; by a work on the medicinal properties of animals, or more particularly of quadrupeds, by Sextus Papirius Placidus  [^599:3] 

 [^599:3]: Or Papyriensis Placitus. 

Actor  [^599:4] 

 [^599:4]: Perhaps merely for "auctor." ed. Fabricius, Bibl. Graec. XIII, 395-423, _Sexti Placiti liber de medicina ex animalibus_. 

- an otherwise quite unknown personage;  [^600:1] 

 [^600:1]: In Montpellier 277, 15th century, "Liber Sesti platonis de animalibus," perhaps because the Apuleius of the _Herbarium_ is called a Platonist. In Digby 43, late 14th century, fol. 15, "Liber Septiplanti Papiensis de bestiis et avibus medicinalis." In Rawlinson C-328, 15th century, fol. 128, "_Incipit liber Papiriensis ex animalibus ex avibus_." The work is sometimes found in juxtaposition with a somewhat similar "_Liber medicinalis de secretis Galieni_," concerning which see below, chapter 64, II, 761. 

by a "letter concerning a little beast" from the king of Egypt or Aesculapius to the emperor Octavian Augustus;  [^600:2] 

 [^600:2]: V.Rose (1875) 337-8 suggests that this is a fragment from a fuller work of Aesculapius to Augustus cited by Thomas of Cantimpre, Albertus Magnus, and Vincent of Beauvais. See also Peter of Abano, _De venenis_, cap. 5, "in epistola Esculapii philosophi ad Octavianum." But perhaps these writers refer to the entire work of Sextus Papirius. 

and by introductory letters, such as we find prefaced to the _De medicamentis_ of Marcellus Empiricus, of "Hippocrates to his Moecenas"  [^600:3] and "Antonius Musus to Moecenas Agrippa." 

 [^600:3]: Ed. Ruellius, with Scribonius Largus, Paris, 1529. 

The epistle of the Egyptian king or Aesculapius to Augustus, however, really forms the introduction or opening chapter to the treatise of Sextus Papirius Placidus on the medicinal properties of animals, and after the little beast or quadruped called mela or taxo  [^600:4] follow fast the stag, serpent, fox, hare, scorpion, and so forth.  
As for the taxo, Augustus is told that by means of it he can protect himself from sorcerers, avoid defections in his army, and preserve his troops from the pestilence which the barbarians bring, and the city of Rome from both pestilences and fires. To this end a lustration should be performed with its flesh, and it should then be buried at the city gates. One way to appropriate its virtue is to extract its large teeth, repeating a jargon of strange words the while. 

 [^600:4]: In a later medieval vocabulary taxus is given as a synonym for the animal called camaleon: Alphita, ed. Daremberg from BN 6954 and 6957 in De Renzi, Collectio Salernitana, III, 272-322. 

## Aethicus.

### Cosmography.

Another characteristic product of declining antique learning and of early medieval effort is found in the field of geography in the Cosmography of Aethicus Istricus, translated into Latin by the priest Jerome (Hieronymus Presbyter). The oldest manuscript is one of the eighth century in the British Museum  [^601:1] 

 [^601:1]: Cotton Vespasian B, X, #6.

where it is also found in several other fairly early manuscripts  [^601:2] 

 [^601:2]: Harleian 3859, called tenth century in the Harleian catalogue which is often incorrect in its dating, but 11th or 12th century by d'Avezac, Mommsen in his edition of Solinus, and Beazley, _Dawn of Geography_, I, 523. Royal 15-B-II and 15-C-IV, both of the I2th century. For other MSS at Paris, Leyden, and Rome see Beazley, op. cit.

in the respectable company of Vitruvius, Vegetius, Sallust, and Suetonius,  [^601:3] as well as with the more congenial work of Solinus. 

 [^601:3]: But after all is Suetonius any more respectable a historian than Aethicus and Solinus are geographers? 

This Cosmographia was not printed until 1852, when it was edited at Paris by M. d'Avezac and again in 1854 at Leipzig by M. H. Wuttke. It is an entirely different work from what had hitherto been repeatedly printed as the _Cosmography_ of Aethicus but is really to be identified with fragments of Julian Honorius and Orosius. The Latin translator of our treatise had been identified in the middle ages with St. Jerome, the church father, and Wuttke still ascribed it to him, but Bunbury protested against this,  [^601:4] 

 [^601:4]: Bunbury, History of Ancient Geography, II, Appendix: "How  M.Wuttke can attach any value to such a production is to me quite incomprehensible; still more that he should ascribe the translation to the great ecclesiastical writer," Jerome. Bunbury believed that  the work was not earlier than the seventh century. Beazley, Daivn of Geography, I, 355-63, is of the same opinion. 

and Mommsen placed our treatise not earlier than the seventh century.  [^601:5] 

 [^601:5]: In his edition of Solinus, p.  xxvii, he contends that certain passages which Wuttke pointed out as common to Aethicus and  Solinus are borrowed by Aethicus from Isidore who died in 636. 

### Its medieval influence.

Bunbury added, however, that the _Cosmography_ "appears to have been much read in the middle ages, and is therefore not without literary interest." The apparent greatness of the names on the title page seems to have given the middle ages an exaggerated notion of the work's importance. Aethicus himself is spoken of as from Istria and according to the Explicit of at least one manuscript  [^601:6] was a Scythian, but this does not mean that his attitude towards learning was that of a Hun, for the same Explicit goes on to inform us that he was of noble lineage and, if I correctly interpret the faulty syntax of its Latin, that from him the ethical philosophy of other sages drew its origins.  
Somewhat later Roger Bacon said in discussing faults in the study of theology in his day, 

. [^601:6]: Harleian 3859. 

"From the authorities of the philosophers whom the saints cite I shall abstain, except that I will strengthen the utterances of Ethicus the astronomer and Alchimus the philosopher by the authority of the blessed Jerome, since no one could credit that they had said so many marvelous things about Christ and the angels and demons and men who are to be glorified or damned unless Jerome or some other saint proved that they had said so."  [^602:1] 

 [^602:1]: Steele, Opera hactenus inedita, 1905, Fasc. I, pp. 1-2. 

### Character of the work.

As Bacon's words indicate, Christian influence is manifest in the _Cosmography_, although, as they also indicate, the original Aethicus is not supposed to have been a Christian, but, as one manuscript informs us, an Academic philosopher.  [^602:2] Oriental influence, too, is perhaps shown in flights of poetical language and unrestrained imagination, in a number of allusions to Alexander the Great, and in an extraordinary ignorance of early Roman history which leads the author to tell how Romulus invaded Pannonia and fought against the Lacedaemonians. "How great carnage," he exclaims, "in Lacedaemonia, Noricum and Pannonia, Istria and Albania, northern regions near my home, first at the hands of the Romans and the tyrant Numitor, then under the brothers Romulus and Remus, and later under the first Tarquin, the Proud." The author eulogizes Athens as well as Alexander, and mentions a people called Turchi, but whether or not he has Turks in mind would be hard to say. 

 [^602:2]: CUL 213, 14th century, fols. 103V-14, "Qui hunc librum legit intelligat Ethicum philosophum non omnia dixisse que hie scripta sunt, set Solinus (so James, but Jeronimus in d'Avezac, p. 237) qui eum transtulit sententias veritati consonas ex libro eiusdem excerpsit et easdem testimonias scripture nostre confirmavit. Non enim erat iste philosophus Christianus sed Ethnicus set professions Achademicus." 

### Its attitude to marvels.

As we have it, the _Cosmography_ cites both the Ethicus and the Alchimus to whom Roger Bacon referred. Indeed, our treatise does not pretend to be the original work of Aethicus, which it repeatedly cites, but is apparently the work of some epitomizer or abbreviator who intersperses remarks and comments of his own, and, according to one manuscript, makes the statements of Aethicus conform to Christian Scripture. From the volumes of the original work he makes only a few excerpts, professing to omit what is unheard of or unknown or seems too formidable, and including only with hesitancy a few bits concerning unknown races on the testimony of hearsay. The enigmas of Aethicus and other philosophers often give our abbreviator pause, and he regards as incredible the story of Aethicus that the Amazons nurse young minotaurs and centaurs who fight for them in return. Aethicus also tells of the wonderful armor of the Amazons which they treat with bitumen and the blood of their own offspring. In Crete Aethicus found herbs unknown in other lands which ward off famine. Very beautiful gems are mentioned, including those extracted from the brains of immense dragons and basilisks, but little is said of their virtues, occult or otherwise. Indeed, the amount either of specific information or specific misinformation in the book is very scanty. It deals largely in uncouth rhetoric, glittering generalities, and obscure allusion anent the wanderings of Aethicus over the face of the earth and the strange marvels which he encountered in distant lands. He is described as well versed in astrology and as reproving the astrologers of Scythia (?) and Mantua (?), and one passage vaguely speaks of the stars as signs of the present and future; but otherwise the abbreviator gives little evidence of knowledge of the subject, although Roger Bacon  [^603:1] cited _Cosmography_ in Cosmographia as one of his authorities when discussing the question of Jesus Christ's nativity and its relation to the stars, 

 [^603:1]: Bridges I, 267-8.

and although Pico della Mirandola ranked the _Cosmography_ as one of the most absurd of astrological works.  [^603:2] 

 [^603:2]: Cited by d'Avezac, pp. 257 and 267. 

As for magic, in one passage malefici and magi are censured along with idolaters, and the author presently speaks of vain characters and superstitious doctrines. But elsewhere a magician (Pirronius magus) is named as the inventor of ships and discoverer of purple. On the whole, in its loose and hazy way the Cosmography not only is romantic and religious enough to appeal to medieval readers, it also is of a character to offer encouragement, if not data, to a later and more detailed interest in alchemy, occult virtues, astrology, and magic. 

### The Geoponica.

Upon the subject of agriculture in the early middle ages we have the collection known as the _Geoponica_. It properly belongs to Byzantine literature and perhaps had little direct influence upon western Europe. Nevertheless at least a por- tion of it upon vineyards was translated into Latin by Burgundio of Pisa in the twelfth century.  [^604:1] In any case as the 

 [^604:1]: Vienna 2272, 14th. century, fol. 92, De vindemiis a Burgundione translatus: Pars Geoponicorum.

> "only formal treatise on Greek agriculture" 

extant it is a rather important historical source; it also is a good specimen of early medieval compilations from classical works; and in its inclusion of superstitious and magical details it is probably roughly representative of the period, whether in east or west. In the form which we now possess it was published about 950 A. D. and dedicated to the Byzantine emperor, Constantine VII or Porphyrygennetos. But this issue was perhaps little more than an abbreviated revision of the work of Cassianus Bassus of the sixth century, whose introductory words to his son are still given at the beginning of the seventh book. Cassianus is believed in his turn to have been especially indebted to two fourth century writers, Vindanius Anatolius of Beirut, whose agricultural teaching was of a sober and rational sort, and Didymus of Alexandria, who was more given to superstition and magic.  [^604:2] 

[^604:2]: Such is the view set forth in PW _Geoponica_. preface lists the earlier editions. 

### Magic and astrology therein.

Nevertheless, magic and astrology find no place in the index to the most recent edition of the work.  [^604:3] 

 [^604:3]: H.Beckh, _Geoponica sive Cassiani Bassi scholastici de re rustica eclogae_ , Lipsiae, Teubner, 1895. PW criticizes this edition as ''leder, v&ouml;lling verfehlten" Its preface list earlier editions.

A survey, however, of the text itself reveals some indications of the presence of both. The very first of its twenty books deals with astrological prediction of the weather and cites some spurious work or works by _Zoroaster_ a great deal.  
In later books, too, _Zoroaster_ is sometimes cited for semi-astrological advice, such as guarding wine jars against sun or moonbeams when opening them, or testing seed by exposing it to the rays of the dog-star.  [^605:1] 

 [^605:1]: _Geoponica_, VII, 5; II, 15. 

_Zoroaster_ is also used as an authority on the sympathy and antipathy existing between natural objects.  [^605:2] 

 [^605:2]: VII, 11; XV, I. 

Damigeron and Democritus are other names cited which are suggestive of the occult and magical.  [^605:3] 

 [^605:3]: I, 12; VII, 13; etc. 

There are not, however, many cases of extreme superstition in the _Geoponica_. Something is said of the marvelous properties of gems, of the effect of a hyena's shadow falling upon a dog by moonlight, and how dogs will not attack a person who holds a hyena's tongue in his hand.  [^605:4] 

 [^605:4]: XV, 1.

Incantations of a sort are occasionally recommended.  [^605:5] 

 [^605:5]: R.Heim, _Incantamenta magica graeca latina_, in Jahrb. f. class.Philologie, Suppl. Bd. 19, Leipzig, 1893, pp. 463-576, drew from the _Geoponica_ 13 out of his total of 24s instances of incantations from Greek and Latin literature. 


To keep wine from turning sour one is directed to write the divine words, "Taste and see that the Lord is good" upon the wine-jar.  [^605:6] 

 [^605:6]: VII, 14. 

Another passage advises a person who finds himself in a place full of fleas to cry, "Ouch ! Ouch !" and then they will not bite him.  [^605:7] 

 [^605:7]: XIII, 15.

## Dioscorides.

Perhaps the chief ancient work on pharmacology was the _De materia medica_ or Περὶ ὕλης ἰατρικῆς of Pedanius Dioscorides of Anazarba. Galen, as we have seen, found things to criticize in it but nevertheless made great use of it in his own work on medicinal simples. Dioscorides of course had his previous sources but seems to have surpassed them in fulness and orderliness of arrangement. Of the man himself his preface tells us all that we know, and his dedication shows that he probably wrote during the reign of Nero. He was born in Cilicia near Tarsus, he had traveled in many lands as a soldier, and his work was based partly upon personal observation and experience as well as previous books. 

### Textual history of the De materia medica.

Dioscorides' influence continued and even increased as time went on; but if future centuries were deeply influenced by his book, it was also seriously affected by them, for it seems to have been subjected to a long series of repeated abbreviations and omissions, additions and interpolations, changes in form and in order. Thus all sorts of versions of what was called Dioscorides came into being, but which in some cases can hardly be regarded as more than compilations from all the favorite pharmacies of the time, in which the genuine Dioscorides constituted but a remnant or a core. Thus most early printed editions of what purports to be the _De materia medica_ must be handled with great caution, and it may perhaps be doubted if even the latest effort of Max Wellmann to recover the original Greek text has been entirely successful.  [^606:1] 

 [^606:1]: The first two volumes, published at Berlin in 1907, 1906, covered the first four of the five genuine books. A previous attempt was K.Sprengel's edition in vols. 25-26 of C.J.K&uuml;hn's _Medici Graeci_, Leipzig, 1829. On the textual history and prohlems see further Wellman's articles: "Dioskurides" in Pauly-Wissowa, and in Hermes, XXXIII, (1898) 36off. 

Of the five books regarded as genuine and original the first dealt with spices, salves, and oils; the second, with parts of animals and animal products like milk and honey, with grains, vegetables, and pot-herbs. Other plants and roots were considered in the third and fourth books, while the last dealt with wines and minerals.  [^606:2] 

 [^606:2]: Περὶ βοτανῶν, περὶ ζῴων παντοίων, περὶ παντοίων ἐλαίων, περὶ ὕλης δένδρων, περὶ οἵνων καὶ λίθων, is another order suggested. 

### Alterations made in the Greek text.

Whether we now possess Dioscorides' original text or not, at any rate the oldest Greek manuscripts do not contain it, but only that portion dealing with herbs. Moreover, this has been rearranged in alphabetical order and has been adapted to fit a set of pictures of plants which were perhaps taken over from the work of Crateuas, one of Dioscorides' chief sources. Such is the famous early sixth century illuminated manuscript made for Juliana Anicia, daughter of the emperor Olybrius (472 A. D.) and wife of the consul Areobindus (about 512 A. D.).  [^607:1] 

 [^607:1]: The MS is said by Singer (1921) 60, to have now been removed from Vienna to St. Mark's Library at Venice; it was procured from Constantinople in 1555 for the future Emperor Maximilian II (1564-1576). A photographic copy was published in 1906 in the Leiden Collection, _Codices Graeci et Latini_, by A.W.Sijthoff, with an introduction by A.von Premerstein, C.Wessely, and J.Mantuani (C.Wessely, _Codex Anciae lulianae_, etc., 1906). See also A.v.Premerstein in the Austrian Jahrbuch (1903) XXIV, 105ff.  
I have examined the fac-simile of this MS and found the large but faded and partially obliterated illuminations which precede the text rather disappointing after having read the description of them in Dalton's Byzantine Art, (1911) 460-61, which, however, I presume is accurate and so reproduce here. These large illuminations include a portrait of Juliana Anicia, an ornamental peacock with tail spread, groups of doctors engaged in medical discussions, and Dioscorides himself seated writing, and again seated on a folding stool receiving the herb marvdragora (which, of course, was a medieval favorite) from a female figure personifying Discovery (Εὕρησις or Εξεύρεση), "while in the foreground a dog dies in agony," presumably from the fatal effects of the herb. There are rough reproductions of this last picture in Woltmann and Woermann, _History of Painting_, I, 192-3, and Singer (1921) ,62. When the text proper begins the illuminations are confined to medicinal plants. 
Other early Greek manuscripts are the Codex Neapolitanns, formerly at Vienna, now at St. Mark's, Venice, an eighth century palimpsest from Bobbio, and a Paris codex, (BN Greek 2179) of the ninth century. An Arabic translation from the Greek seems to have been made about 850; a century later the Byzantine emperor sent a Greek manuscript of Dioscorides to the caliph in Spain. 
For the full text of the _De materia medica_ we are dependent on MSS of the 11th, 12th, 13th and later centuries. 

The alphabetical rearrangement of the Greek text of Dioscorides was made at some time between Galen and Oribasius, who cites from it in the fourth century. Not only were the five books of the genuine _De materia medica_ interpolated, but additional spurious books were added "On Harmful Drugs" and "On Poisons."  [^607:2] 

 [^607:2]: Περὶ ἑδηλητηρίων φαρμάκων ἀῃὰπερὶ ἰοβόλων, edited by Sprengel 
in K&uuml;hn (1830), XXVI, as was the  Περὲ εὐπορίστων ἁπλῶν τε καὶ συνθέτων φαρμάκων. 
The Περὶ φαρμάκων ἐμπειρίας. ("Experimental Pharmacy"), of which a Latin version, _Alphabetum empiricum, sive Dioscoridis et Stephani Atleniensis_ . . . de remediis expertis, was edited by C.Wolf, Zurich, 1581, is an alphabetical arrangement by diseases ascribed to Dioscorides and Stephen of Athens (and other writers). 

The work on medicinal simples attributed to Dioscorides is extant in no manuscript earlier than the fourteenth century and some versions of it are much more interpolated than others. As Galen does not cite it while Oribasius and Aëtius  do use it, it is assumed that it was composed in the third or early fourth century with a forged dedication to a contemporary of Dioscorides, but that it made considerable use of the genuine Dioscorides, to which it bore much the same relation as the _Medicina Plinii_ did to the _Historia Naturalis_. Later, however, some Byzantine compiler of the eleventh, twelfth, or thirteenth century introduced a great deal of new material from Galen's genuine and spurious works in that field and from John of Damascus.  [^608:1] 

 [^608:1]: Max Wellmann, Die Schrift des Dioskurides Περὶ ἁπλῶν φαρμάκων, 1914, and col. 1140 of his article "Dioskurides" in Pauly-Wissowa. 

### Dioscorides little known to Latins before the middle ages.

What more especially concern us are the medieval Latin versions of Dioscorides. As a matter of fact, although the _De materia medica_ was from the start highly regarded and widely used by Greek physicians, it seems to have been little known to Latin writers until the verge of the medieval period. Gargilius Martialis, a Roman writer on agriculture in the third century of our era, was the only old Latin author to cite Dioscorides, which he did, however, no less than eighteen times in his Medicinae ex olerihiis et pomis. This has led to the suggestion that he was perhaps responsible for the first Latin translation or version of Dioscorides; but it seems unlikely that the work had been put into Latin as early as his time, since it is not cited again by a Latin writer until the sixth century and is not used by such medical authors as Serenus Sammonicus, Cassius Felix, Theodorus Priscianus, and Marcellus Empiricus. 

### Partial versions in Latin.

But at least a portion of Dioscorides seems to have been translated into Latin by the time of Cassiodorus, who, writ- ing in the first half of the sixth century, states that those who cannot read Greek may consult the _Herbarium Dioscoridis_ .  [^608:2] 

 [^608:2]: De inst. div. lit. cap. 31. 

This naturally suggests a version limited to medicinal plants like the early Greek text in the manuscript of Juliana Anicia. This impression is confirmed by the preface to some early Latin version of Dioscorides, which Rose discovered in one of the manuscripts of the _Herbarium_ of Apuleius in the British Museum.  [^609:1] This preface implies that the translation which it introduced was limited to the botanical books of Dioscorides and states that it was accompanied by illustrations of herbs. 

 [^609:1]: V.Rose in Hermes VIII, 38A. Harleian 4986, fol. 44V, ". . . marcelline libellum botanicon ex dioscoridis libris in latinum sermonem conversum in quo depicte sunt herbarum figure ad te misi . . ." 

### _De herbis femininis_.
 
Based upon this partial translation rather than identical with it is believed to have been the _De herbis femininis_,  [^609:2] which was ascribed to Dioscorides in the middle ages and which often accompanies the _Herbarium_ of the Pseudo-Apuleius in the manuscripts. 

 [^609:2]: Heinrich Kaetsner, Kritisches und Exegctisches zti Pseudo- Dioskorides _De herbis femininis_, Regensburg, 1896; text in Hermes XXXI (1896) 578-636. Singer (1921) 68, gives as the earhest MS, Rome Barberini IX, 29, of 9th century. Some other MSS are: BN 12995, 9th century; Additional 8928, 11th century, fol. 62V-; Ashmole 1431, end of 11th century, fols. 31V-43, "Incipit liber Dioscoridis ex herbis feminis"; Sloane 1975, 12th or early 13th century, fols. 49V-73; Harleian 1585, 12th century, fol. 79- ; Harleian 5294, I2th century; Turin K-IV-3, 12th century, #5, "Incipit liber dioscoridis medicine ex herbis femininis numero LXXI . . / . . Liber medicine dioscoridis de herbis femininis et masculinis explicit feliciter." In Vienna 5371, 15th century, fols._i2iv-i24v, is a briefer Latin treatise ascribed to Dioscordes, which begins with the herb aristologia and mentions silk (sericum) at its close. I have not seen the MS but from the title, Quid pro quo, and the fact that the writer dedicates it to his uncle, one might fancy that it was a work written by Adelard of Bath's nephew in return for the Natural Questions of his uncle. (See below, chapter 36).

In this case the herbs of the Pseudo-Apuleius are sometimes called masculine, but as a matter of fact only a minority of those in the Pseudo-Dioscorides seem to be distinctly feminine. Of seventy-one plants Kaestner classed fifteen or sixteen as feminine, while in only thirty cases are they prescribed for female com- plaints. Rose dated this work before Isidore of Seville by whom he believed it was used.  [^609:3] It seems to combine a free Latin translation of excerpts from the genuine Dioscorides with numerous additions from other sources.

 [^609:3]: Hermes VIII, 38, comparing Etymologies XVII, 93, with cap. 30 of the _De herbis femininis_. 

### The fuller Latin versions.
 
Besides such abbreviated and interpolated Latin versions or perversions of Dioscorides, there was also in existence in the early middle ages a literal translation of all five books of the _De materia medica_. It is full of Latinisms and barbarisms but otherwise reproduces the complete and genuine Dioscorides, or is supposed to do so. Rose and Wellmann  [^610:1] say that it was current from the sixth century on, 

 [^610:1]: Anecdota graeca et graeco-latina, Berlin, 1864, II, 115 and 119; Hermes VIII, 38; Wellmann (1906), p. xxi. 

and the few extant manuscripts of it date from the early medieval period.  [^610:2] 

 [^610:2]: BN 9332, 8th century; CLM 337. 9-10th century from Monte Cassino; ed. T.M.Auracher et H.Stadler, in Rom. Forsch. I, 49-105; X, 181-247 and 368-446; XI, 1-121 ; XII, 161-243. 

One reason for this seems to be that this literal translation was replaced by another Latin version which in a Bamberg manuscript  [^610:3] is ascribed to Constantinus Africanus, the medical translator and writer of the eleventh century. 

 [^610:3]: Cod. Bam. L-III-9. 

In this version the items are arranged alphabetically, and additions are embodied from other sources. This version apparently became much better known than the earlier literal translation and has been called 

> "the most widely disseminated handbook of pharmacy of the whole later middle ages."  [^610:4] 

 [^610:4]: PW "Dioskurides." A fairly early MS is CU Jesus 44, I2-I3th century, fols. I7-I45r, "diascorides per modum alphabeti de virtutibus herbarum et compositione olerum." I have not seen it but, if correctly dated, it and Bologna University Library 378, 12th century, which is said to differ from the printed editions, are too early to be Peter of Abano's version. 

It is stated by Rose to be identical with the "Dyascorides," upon which Peter of Abano lectured and commented about 1300 and which was printed at Colle in 1478 and again at Lyons in 1512.  [^610:5] 

 [^610:5]: Explicit dyascorides quern petrus paduanensis legendo corexit et exponendo quae utiliora sunt in lucem deduxit, Colle, 1478. Dioscorides digestus alphabctico ordine odditis annotatiunculis brevihus et tractatu aquarum, Lugduni, 1512. And see Chap. 70, Appendix II. 

### Peter of Abano's account of the medieval versions.

Peter of Abano tells us in his preface  [^610:6] that in his time there were current two different versions, although both had the same preface. One of these was in five books with a great many short chapters, so short in fact that often the treatment of a single thing was scattered over several chapters. This version was rare in Latin. 

 [^610:6]: I have read it in BN 6820, fol. ir, as well as in the 1478 edition. 

The other version contained fewer but longer chapters with material added from Galen, Pliny, and other writers. This version was arranged alphabetically. It was this version which _Aggregator_  [^611:1] had followed and imitated, but sometimes there were chapters in either "Dyascorides" which were missing in _Aggregator_. Peter had also seen an alphabetical version of Dioscorides in Greek. 

 [^611:1]: A work by Serapion which Simon Cordo of Genoa translated from Arabic into Latin with the help of Abraham, a Jew of Tortosa. Serapion states at the beginning that his work is a combination of Dioscorides and of the work of Galen on medicinal simples. _Aggregator_ was printed in 1479, Liber Scrapionis aggregatus in medicinis simplicibus. Translatio Sytnonis lanucnsis interprete Abraani iudco tortiiosiensi de, arabico in latinum. 

### Pseudo-Dioscorides on stones.

There seems also to have been current, at least in the later middle ages, a Pseudo-Dioscorides on stones, drawn in part, like the _Feminine Herbs_, from the genuine _De materia medica_, whose discussion of the virtues of stones is incredible enough.  [^611:2] 

 [^611:2]: Ruska (1912), p. 5, says that Dioscorides, V, 84-133, among other things describes "eine ganze Reihe von h&ouml;chst zweifelhaften Steinen mit unglaublichen Wirkungen die in den Arabischen Arzneimittelverzeichnissen und Steinb&uuml;chern niederkehren." 

This _Dioscorides on Stones_ is cited by Arnold of Saxony and Bartholomew of England in the thirteenth century, and portions at least of the work are extant in manuscripts at Erfurt and Montpellier.  [^611:3] 

  [^611:3]: Amplon. Folio 41, fols. 36-7; Montpellier 277, caps. 46-67 of the treatise entitled, _Liber aristotelis de lapidibus preciosis secundum verba sapicntium antiquorum_. 

A work on physical ligatures is ascribed to Dioscorides in a late manuscript,  [^611:4] but is really a collection of items from various authors since Dioscorides on the marvelous virtues of animals, herbs, and stones, especially when bound on the body, held in the hand, or worn around the neck. 

 [^611:4]: Sloane 3848, 17th century, fols. 36-40. 

### Conclusions from the textual history of Dioscorides.

The history of the medieval versions of Dioscorides, even in the brief and incomplete outline given here, is instructive, showing us in general the vicissitudes to which the transmission of the text of any ancient author may have been subjected, but more especially proving that the middle ages, whether Latin or Byzantine, were ready to take great liberties with ancient authorities and to adapt them to their own taste and requirements. And indeed, why should they not rearrange and make additions to their Dioscorides? After all it was a compilation to begin with.  
But the case of Dioscorides has also taught us that we do not have to wait until the medieval period for the appearance of new versions of an ancient author.  

## Macer on herbs; its great currency,

With the possible exception of the _Herbarium_ of the Pseudo-Apuleius, probably the best known single and distinct treatment of the virtues of herbs produced during the middle ages was the poem _De viribus herbarum_ which circulated under the name of Macer Floridus.  [^612:1] 

 [^612:1]:  _Macer Floridus de viribus herbarum una cum Walafridi Strabonis, Othonis Creinonensis et loannis Folcz carminibus similis argumenti_, ed. Ludovicus Choulant, 1832. 

It was often cited by the medieval encyclopedists and other writers on nature and medicine in the twelfth and thirteenth centuries.  [^612:2] 

 [^612:2]: V.Rose himself corrected {Hermes, VIII, 330-1) the strange statement which he had made {Hermes, VIII, 63) that the name "Macer" is not found in connection with this work until MSS of the 14th and 15th centuries. Both the treatise and the name are frequent in the earlier MSS. 

It is found in an Anglo-Saxon version  [^612:3] 

 [^612:3]; Cotton, Vitellius C, III. 

and was even translated into Danish in the early thirteenth century.  [^612:4] 

  [^612:4]: The Dane, Harpestreng, who died in 1244, translated and commented upon the poem; published by Christian Molbech, Copenhagen, 1826. 

Manuscripts of it are very numerous  [^612:5] 

 [^612:5]: There are a large number in the MSS collections of the British Museum alone. Some said to be of the 12th century are Harleian 4346, and at Erfurt Amplon. Octavo 62a and 62b.

and there are many early printed editions.  [^612:6] 

 [^612:6]: See the British Museum cata- logue of printed books. I have used besides Choulant's text of 1832 an illustrated octavo edition probably of 1489. The poem also appears in medical collections such as _Medici antiqui omnes_. Aldus, Venice, 1547, fols. 223-46. 

Even as recently as the first half of the nineteenth century a historian of medicine and natural science, in the preface of his edition of Macer, stated as one argument for the modern study of medieval medicine that much might be learned from writings of that period concerning the virtues of herbs.  [^612:7] 

 [^612:7]: Choulant (1832) Preface.

### Problem of date and author.

The poem was certainly not written by the classical poet, Aemilius Macer, who was a friend of Vergil and Ovid, and whose descriptions of plants, birds, and reptiles are cited by Pliny in his _Natural History_ and also preserved in some extracts by the grammarians. Proof of this is that our poem cites Pliny; in fact, it cites him more frequently than any other author. It also cites Galen six times, Dioscorides four, and as late an author as Oribasius twice.  [^613:1] 

 [^613:1]: Choulant (1832) _Prolegomena ad Macrum_, p. 14.

But Oribasius is not the latest author cited since Walafrid Strabo is also used.  [^613:2] 

 [^613:2]: See the description of Ligusticum. lines 900-6.

Strabo was born about 806, became abbot of Reichenau in 842, and died in 849. In his Hortulus, a poem dedicated to Grimoald, the abbot of St. Gall, he described twenty-three herbs in 444 hexameters.  [^613:3] 

 [^613:3]: Often printed: ed. F.A.Reuss, W&uuml;rzburg, 1834; in Migne PL 114, 1 1 19-30. 

Indeed Stadler holds that the Pseudo-Macer uses the _De gradibus_ of Constantinus Africanus who did not die until 1087.  [^613:4]  
The true author of our poem ascribed to Macer is said on the authority of certain manuscripts to have been an Odo of Meung on the Loire, apparently the same town as the birthplace of Jean Clopinel or de Meun, the learned author of the latter portion of _The Romance of the Rose_. 

 [^613:4]: H.Stadler, _Die Quellen des Macer Floridus_, in Sudhoff (1909). 

Choulant, however, did not regard this as sufficiently proved, and Stadler has recently noted that some manuscripts ascribe the poem to a physician, Odo of Verona; and others to the Cistercian, Odo of Morimont, who died in 1161.  [^613:5] 

 [^613:5]: Stadler, op. cit.; Choulant (1832), p. 4.

In any case, unless the mentions of Strabo are later interpolations, the author must be regarded as post-Carolingian, while he cannot be later than the eleventh century in view of a remark of Sigebertus Gemblacensis in 1112,  [^613:6] 

 [^613:6]: Macer scripsit metrico stilo librum. _De viribus herbarum_, Stadler (1909), 65.

the Anglo-Saxon version, the many twelfth century manuscripts, and the frequent use of his poem in the _Regimen Salernitanum_  [^613:7] 

 [^613:7]: It was, however, a good deal subject to later interpolation. 

Although Macer seems a pseudonym to begin with, the original poem, consisting of 2269 lines in which 77 herbs are discussed, is sometimes accompanied by additional lines regarded as spurious.  [^613:8] 

 [^613:8]: Choulant (1832) adds as Macri spuria 487 lines concerning twenty herbs. 
In Vienna 3207, 15th century, fols. 1-50, Macer Floridus, De viribus herbarum; fols. 50-52,  Pseudo-Macer, De animalibus et lignis. 

### Virtues ascribed to herbs

Our poet does not appear to have much of his own to offer on the subject of the virtues of herbs. When he does not cite his authority by name, he usually qualifies the statement made by a vaguer "they say" or "it is said." He does not connect certain herbs with certain stars or otherwise introduce anything that can be called astrological. He repeats Pliny's statement of the powers ascribed to vervain by the magi, such as to gain one's desires, win the friendship of the powerful, and dispel disease and fever. Pliny had spoken of the magi as "raving about this herb"; our poet says: 

> "Although potent Nature can grant such virtues, 

> Yet they really seem to us idle old-wives' tales."  [^614:1]

 [^614:1]: Lines 1901-2, Quae, quamvis natura potens concedere posset Vana tamen nobis et anilia iure videntur. 

Nevertheless he himself about fifteen lines before had said of the vervain: 

> "If, holding this herb in the hand, you ask the patient, 

> Say, brother, how are you?' and the patient answers, 'Well,' 

> He will live; but if he says 'ill,' there is no hope of safety."  [^614:2] 

 [^614:2]: Lines 1881-3, Hanc herham gestando manu si queris ab egro Die frater quid agis? bene si responderit eger, Vivet, si vera male, spes est nulla salutis. 

Our poet not only thus associates with herbs the virtue of divination, but is guilty of sympathetic magic when he believes that the ancients learned by experience that Dragontea or snake-weed dispels poisons, wards off snakes, and is good for snake-bite from observing the similarity between the spotted rind of the herb and the skin of a snake.  [^614:3] 

 [^614:3]: Herb 54. lines 1728

Odo or Macer repeats Galen's story of curing an epileptic boy by suspending a root of peony about his neck,  [^614:4] 

 [^614:4]: Herb 49, lines 1617-27. 

and later asserts the same virtue for the herb pyrethrum.  [^614:5] 

 [^614:5]: Herb 67, lines 2095

Even more magical is the ceremony for curing toothache which he takes from Pliny and which consists in digging up the herb _Senecion_ without use of iron, touching the aching tooth with it three times, and then replacing the plant in the place where it came from so that it will grow again.  [^614:6] 

 [^614:6]: Herb 51, lines 1685-9. 

Pliny is also cited concerning the swallow's restoring the sight of its young by swallow-wort.  [^615:1] 

 [^615:1]: Herb 52.

Our poet also repeats such beliefs as that the herb Buglossa preserves the memory,  [^615:2] 

 [^615:2]: Herb 34, lines 1 135-8.

or that the smoke of Aristochia dispels demons and exhilarates infants.  [^615:3] 

 [^615:3]: Herb 41, lines 1421-2.

If the hives are anointed with the juice of the herb Barrocus, the bees will not desert them; while carrying that plant with one is a protection against the stings of bees, wasps, and spiders.  [^615:4]   
Among the virtues most frequently attributed to herbs are expelling or killing worms, curing pestiferous bites or poisons, and provoking urine or vomiting. On the whole, "Macer" contains only a moderate amount of superstition, although rather more proportionally than Walafrid Strabo. 

[^615:4]: Herb 50, lines 1641-63. 

### Experiments of Macer.

Although Odo or Macer seems to make no original contribution to botany, cites authorities frequently, and speaks  often of the ancients or men of old, he also at least once cites "experts"  [^615:5] 

 [^615:5]: Herb 69, _Cyminum_, lines 2118-9, "Hoc orthopnoicis miram praestare medelam Experti dicunt cum lpusce saepius haustum."

and we have also seen his belief that the ancients had tested the virtues of plants by experience. This rather slight experimental character of the work is further emphasized in some manuscripts of it, where the title is "Experiments of Macer" and the matter seems to have been re-arranged under diseases instead of by herbs.  [^615:6] 

  [^615:6]: Vienna 2532, 12th century, fols.106-17, "Experimenta Macri. Ad  dolorem capitis. Accipe balsamum et instilla .../... adde sucum celidonie et superpone vulneri bus."   
Arundel 295, 14th century, fols. 222-33, "Experimenta Macri collecta sub certis capitulis a Gotefrido." 




