

# A history of magic and experimental science  

## The first thirteen centuries of our era  

### By Lynn Thorndike  

Volume I

COLUMBIA UNIVERSITY PRESS  
NEW YORK AND LONDON

Copyright 1923 Columbia University Press  
First published by The Macmillan Company 1923  
ISBN 0-231-08794-2  
Manufactured in the United States of America  

## PREFACE
  
This work has been long in preparation - ever since in 1902-1903 Professor James Harvey Robinson, when my mind was still in the making, suggested the study of magic in medieval universities as the subject of my thesis for the master's degree at Columbia University - and has been foreshadowed by other publications, some of which are listed under my name in the preliminary bibliography. Since this was set up in type there have also appeared: "_Galen: the Man and His Times_," in The Scientific Monthly, January, 1922; "_Early Christianity and Natural Science_," in _The Biblical Review_, July, 1922; "_The Latin Pseudo-Aristotle and Medieval Occult Science_," in _The Journal of English and Germanic Philology_, April, 1922; and notes on [Daniel of Morley] and  [Gundissalinus] in _The English Historical Review_.   
For permission to make use of these previous publications in the present work I am indebted to the editors of the periodicals just mentioned, and also to the editors of The Columbia University Studies in History, Economics, and Public Law, The American Historical Review, Classical Philology, The Monist, Nature, The Philosophical Review, and Science. The form, however, of these previous publications has often been altered in embodying them in this book, and, taken together, they constitute but a fraction of it. Book I greatly amplifies the account of magic in the Roman Empire contained in my doctoral dissertation. Over ten years ago I prepared an account of magic and science in the twelfth and thirteenth centuries based on material available in print in libraries of this country and arranged topically, but I did not publish it, as it seemed advisable to supplement it by study abroad and of the manuscript material, and to adopt an arrangement by authors. The result is Books IV and V of the present work.  
My examination of manuscripts has been done especially at the British Museum, whose rich collections, perhaps because somewhat inaccessibly catalogued, have been less used by students of medieval learning than such libraries as the Bodleian and Bibliotheque Nationale. I have worked also, however, at both Oxford and Paris, at Munich, Florence, Bologna, and elsewhere; but it has of course been impossible to examine all the thousands of manuscripts bearing upon the subject, and the war prevented me from visiting some libraries, such as the important medieval collection of Amplonius at Erfurt. However, a fairly wide survey of the catalogs of collections of manuscripts has convinced me that I have read a representative selection. Such classified lists of medieval manuscripts as Mrs. Dorothea Singer has undertaken for the British Isles should greatly facilitate the future labors of investigators in this field.  
Although working in a rather new field, I have been aided by editions of medieval writers produced by modern scholarship, and by various series, books, and articles tending, at least, in the same direction as mine. Some such publications have appeared or come to my notice too late for use or even for mention in the text: for instance, another edition of the _De medicamentis_ of Marcellus Empiricus by M. Niedermann; the printing of the _Twelve Experiments with Snakeskin_ of John Paulinus by J.W.S. Johnsson in _Bull. d.I. societe frang. d'hist. d. l. med._, XII, 257-67; the detailed studies of Sante Ferrari on Peter of Abano; and A. Franz, _Die kirchlichen Benediktionen im Mittelalter_, 1909, 2 vols. The breeding place of the eel (to which I allude at I, 491) is now, as a result of recent investigation by Dr. J. Schmidt, placed "about 2500 miles from the mouth of the English Channel and 500 miles north-east of the Leeward Islands" (_Discovery_, Oct., 1922, p. 256) instead of in the Mediterranean.  
A man who once wrote in Dublin [^X:1] complained of the difficulty of composing a learned work so far from the Bodleian and British Museum, and I have often felt the same way. When able to visit foreign collections or the largest libraries in this country, or when books have been sent for my use for a limited period, I have spent all the available time in the collection of material, which has been written up later as opportunity offered. 

 [^X:1]: H.Cotton, _Five Books of Maccabees_, 1832, pp. ix-x

Naturally one then finds many small and some important points which require verification or further investigation, but which must be postponed until one's next vacation or trip abroad, by which time some of the smaller points are apt to be forgotten.  
Of such loose threads I fear that more remain than could be desired. And I have so often caught myself in the act of misinterpretation, misplaced emphasis, and other mistakes, that I have no doubt there are other errors as well as omissions which other scholars will be able to point out and which I trust they will. Despite this prospect, I have been bold in affirming my independent opinion on any point where I have one, even if it conflicts with that of specialists or puts me in the position of criticizing my betters. Constant questioning, criticism, new points of view, and conflict of opinion are essential in the pursuit of truth.  
After some hesitation I decided, because of the expense, the length of the work, and the increasing unfamiliarity of readers with Greek and Latin, as a rule not to give in the footnotes the original language of passages used in the text. I have, however, usually supplied the Latin or Greek when I have made a free translation or one with which I felt that others might not agree. But in such cases I advise critics not to reject my rendering utterly without some further examination of the context and line of thought of the author or treatise in question, since the wording of particular passages in texts and manuscripts is liable to be corrupt, and since my purpose in quoting particular passages is to illustrate the general attitude of the author or treatise. In describing manuscripts I have employed quotation marks when I knew from personal examination or otherwise that the Latin was that of the manuscript itself, and have omitted quotation marks where the Latin seemed rather to be that of the description in the catalog. Usually I have let the faulty spelling and syntax of medieval copyists stand without comment. But as I am not an expert in palaeography and have examined a large number of manuscripts primarily for their substance, the reader should not regard my Latin quotations from them as exact transliterations or carefully considered texts. He should also remember that there is little uniformity in the manuscripts themselves. I have tried to reduce the bulk of the footnotes by the briefest forms of reference consistent with clearness -consult lists of abbreviations and of works frequently cited by author and date of publication - and by use of appendices at the close of certain chapters.  
Within the limits of a preface I may not enumerate all the libraries where I have been permitted to work or which have generously sent books - sometimes rare volumes - to Cleveland for my use, or all the librarians who have personally assisted my researches or courteously and carefully answered my written inquiries, or the other scholars who have aided or encouraged the preparation of this work, but I hope they may feel that their kindness has not been in vain. In library matters I have perhaps most frequently imposed upon the good nature of Mr, Frederic C.Erb of the Columbia University Library, Mr. Gordon W.Thayer, in charge of the John G.White collection in the Cleveland Public Library, and Mr. George F.Strong, librarian of Adelbert College, Western Reserve University; and I cannot forbear to mention the interest shown in my work by Dr.R.L.Poole at the Bodleian. For letters facilitating my studies abroad before the war or application for a passport immediately after the war I am indebted to the Hon. Philander C.Knox, then Secretary of State, to Frederick P.Keppel, then Assistant Secretary of War, to Drs. J.Franklin Jameson and Charles F.Thwing, and to Professors Henry E.Bourne and Henry Crew. Professors C.H.Haskins, [^XII:1] L.C.Karpinski, W.G.Leutner, W.A,Locy, D.B.Macdonald, L.J.Paetow, S.B.Platner, E.C.Richardson, James Harvey Robinson, David Eugene Smith, D'Arcy W.Thompson, A.H.Thorndike, E.L.Thorndike, T.Wingate Todd, and Hutton Webster, and Drs. Charles Singer and Se Boyar have kindly read various chapters in manuscript or proof and offered helpful suggestions. 

 [^XII:1]: But Professor Haskins' recent article in Isis on "Michael Scot and Frederick 11" and my chapter on Michael Scot were written quite independently.  

The burden of proofreading has been generously shared with me by Professors B.P.Bourland, C.D.Lamberton, and Walter Libby, and especially by Professor Harold North Fowler who has corrected proof for practically the entire work. 

After receiving such expert aid and sound counsel I must assume all the deeper guilt for such faults and indiscretions as the book may display.

  [Daniel of Morley]: https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Daniel_of_Morley  

 [Gundissalinus]:  https://www.encyclopedia.com/religion/encyclopedias-almanacs-transcripts-and-maps/dominic-gundisalvi-gundissalinus

# Abbreviations.
 
_Abhandl._ Abhandlungen zur Geschichte der Mathematischen Wissenschaften, begrundet von M. Cantor, Teubner, Leipzig.  
_Addit._ Additional Manuscripts in the British Museum.  
_Amplon,_ Manuscript collection of Amplonius Ratinck at Erfurt.  
_AN_ Ante-Nicene Fathers, American Reprint of the Edinburgh edition, in 9 vols., 1913.  
_AS_ Acta sanctorum.  
_Beitrage_ Beitrage zur Geschichte der Philosophie des Mittelalters, ed. by C, Baeumker, G.v. Hertling, M.Baumgartner, et al., Miinster, 1891-.  
_BL_ Bodleian Library, Oxford,  
_BM_ British Museum, London.  
_BN_ Bibliotheque Nationale, Paris.  
_Borgnet_ Augustus Borgnet, ed. B. Alberti Magni Opera omnia, Paris, 1890- 1899, in 38 vols.  
_Brewer_ Fr. Rogeri Bacon Opera quaedam hactenus in-edita, ed. J.S.Brewer, London, 1859, in RS, XV.  
_Bridges_ The Opus Maius of Roger Bacon, ed, J.H. Bridges, I-II, Oxford, 1897; III, 1900.    
_CCAG_ Catalogus codicum astrologorum Graecorum, ed. F. Cumont, W. Kroll, F. Boll, et al., 1898.  
_CE_ Catholic Encyclopedia.  
_CFCB_ Census of Fifteenth Century Books Owned in America, compiled by a committee of the Bibliographical Society of America, New York, 1919.  
_CLM_ Codex Latinus Monacensis (Latin MS at Munich).  
_CSEL_ Corpus scriptorum ecclesiasticorum latinorum,Vienna, i866~. 
_CU_ Cambridge University (used to distinguish MSS in colleges having the same names as those at Oxford).  
_CUL_ Cambridge University Library.  
_DNB_ Dictionary of National Biography.  
_EB_ Encyclopedia Britannica, n-th edition.  
_EETS_ Early English Text Society Publications.  
_EHR_ English Historical Review.  
_ERE_ Encyclopedia of Religion and Ethics, ed. J.Hastings et al., 1908-.  
_HL_ Histoire Litteraire de la France.  
_HZ_ Historische Zeitschrift, Munich, 1859-.  
_K&uuml;hn_ Medici Graeci, ed. C. J. K&uuml;hn, Leipzig, 1829, containing the works of Galen, Dioscorides, etc.  
_MG_ Monumenta Germaniae.  
_MS_ Manuscript.  
_MSS_ Manuscripts.  
_Muratori_ Rerum Italicarum scriptores ab anno aerae christianae 500 ad 1500, ed. L. A. Muratori, 1723-1751.  
_NH_ C. Plinii Secundi Naturalis Historia (Pliny's Natural History).  
_PG_ Migne, Patrologiae cursus completus, series graeca.  
_PL_ Migne, Patrologiae cursus completus, series latina.  
_PN_ The Nicene and Post-Nicene Fathers, Second Series, ed. Wace and Schaff, 1890-1900, 14 vols.  
_PW_ Pauly and Wissowa, Realencyclopadie der classischen Altertumswissenschaft.
_RS_ "Rolls Series," or Rerum Britannicarum mediiaevi scriptores, 99 works in 244 vols., London, 1858 - 1896.  
_TU_ Texte und Untersuchungen zur Geschichte der altchristlichen Literatur, ed. Gebhardt und Hamack. 
 
# Designation of manuscripts. 

Individual manuscripts are usually briefly designated in the ensuing notes and appendices by a single word indicating the place or collection where the MS is found and the num- ber or shelf-mark of the individual MS. So many of the catalogs of MSS collections which I consulted were undated and without name of author that I have decided to attempt no catalog of them. The brief designations that I give will be sufficient for anyone who is interested in MSS. In giving Latin titles, Incipits, and the like of MSS I employ quotation marks when I know from personal examination or otherwise that the wording is that of the MS itself, and omit the marks where the Latin seems rather to be that of the description in the manuscript catalog or other source of information. In the following List of Works Frequently Cited are included a few MSS catalogs whose authors I shall have occasion to refer to by name. 
 
# List of works frequently cited.

## By author and date of publication or brief title.
 
For more detailed bibliography on specific topics and for editions or manuscripts of the texts used see the bibliographies, references, and appendices to individual chapters. I also include here some works of general interest or of rather cursory character which I have not had occasion to mention elsewhere; and I usually add, for purposes of differentiation, other works in our field by an author than those works by him which are frequently cited. Of the many histories of the sciences, medicine, and magic that have appeared since the invention of printing I have included but a small selection. Almost without exception they have to be used with the greatest caution.
  
  * Abano, Peter of. Conciliator differentiarum philosophorum et praecipue medicorum, 1472, 1476, 1521, 1526, etc.  
  * De venenis, 1472, 1476, 1484, 1490, 1515, 1521, etc.  
  * Abel, ed. Orphica, 1885.  
  * Abelard, Peter. Opera hactenus seorsim edita, ed. V. Cousin, Paris, 1849-1859, 2 vols.  
Ouvrages inedits, ed. V. Cousin, 1835.  
  * Abt, Die Apologie des Apuleius von Madaura und die antike Zauberei, Giessen, 1908.  
  * Achmetis Oneirocriticon, ed. Rigaltius, Paris, 1603.  
  * Adelard of Bath, Ouaestiones naturales, 1480, 1485, etc.  
De eodem et diverso, ed. H. Willner, Miinster, 1903.  
  * Ahrens, K. Das Buch der Naturgegenstande, 1892.  
Zur Geschichte des sogenannten Physiologus, 1885.  
  * Ailly, Pierre d', Tractatus de ymagine mundi (and other works), 1480 (?).  
  * Albertus Magnus, Opera omnia, ed. A. Borgnet, Paris, 1890-1899, 38 vols.  
  * Allbutt, Sir T. Clifford. The Historical Relations of Medicine and Surgery to the End of the Sixteenth Century,
London, 1905, 122 pp.; an address delivered at the St.Louis Congress in 1904.  
The Rise of the Experimental Method in Oxford, London, 1902, 53 pp., from Journal of the Oxford University Junior Scientific Club, May, 1902, being the ninth Robert Boyle Lecture.  
Science and Medieval Thought, London, 1901, 116
brief pages. The Harveian Oration delivered before
the Royal College of Physicians.  
  * Allendy, R.F. L'Alchimie et la Medecine; fitude sur les
theories hermetiques dans I'histoire de la medecine, Paris, 1912, 155 pp.  
  * Anz, W. Zur Frage nach dem Ursprung des Gnostizismus, Leipzig, 1897.  
  * Aquinas, Thomas. Opera omnia, ed. E. Frette et P. Mare, Paris, 1871 -1880, 34 vols.  
  * Aristotle, De animalibus historia, ed. Dittmeyer, 1907; English translations by R. Creswell, 1848, and D'Arcy W. Thompson, Oxford, 1910.  
  * Pseudo-Aristotle. Lapidarius, Merszborg, 1473.  
Secretum secretorum, Latin translation from the Arabic by Philip of Tripoli in many editions; and see Gaster.  
  * Arnald of Villanova, Opera, Lyons, 1532.  
  * Artemidori Daldiani et Achmetis Sereimi F. Oneirocritica;  
Astrampsychi et Nicephori versus etiam Oneirocritici;  
Nicolai Rigaltii ad Artemidorum Notae, Paris, 1603.  
  * Ashmole, Elias, Theatrum chemicum Britannicum, 1652.  
  * Astruc, Jean. Memoires pour servir a I'histoire de la Faculte de Medecine de Montpellier, Paris, 1767.  
  * Auriferae artis quam chemiam vocant antiquissimi auctores,Basel, 1572.  
  * Barach et Wrobel, Bibliotheca Philosophorum Mediae Aetatis, 1876-1878, 2 vols.  
  * Bartholomew of England, De proprietatibus rerum Lingelbach, Heidelberg, 1488, and other editions.  
  * Bauhin, De plantis a divis sanctisve nomen habentibus, Basel, 1 59 1.  
  * Baur, Ludwig, ed. Gundissalinus De divisione philosophiae, M&uuml;nster, 1903.  
Die Philosophischen Werke des Robert Grosseteste,M&uuml;nster, 1912.  
  * Beazley, C.R. The Dawn of Modern Geography, London, 1 897-1 906, 3 vols.  
  * Bernard, E. Catalog! librorum manuscriptorum Angliae etHiberniae in unum collecti (The old catalogue of the Bodleian MSS), Tom. I, Pars i, Oxford, 1697.  
  * Berthelot, P.E.M. Archeologie et histoire des sciences avec publication nouvelle du papyrus grec chimique de Leyde et impression originale du Liber de septuaginta de Geber, Paris, 1906.  
Collection des anciens alchimistes grecs, 1887- 1888, 3 vols.  
Introduction a I'etude de la chimie des anciens et du moyen age, 1889.  
La chimie au moyen age, 1893, 3 vols.  
Les origines de I'alchimie, 1885.  
Sur les voyages de Galien et de Zosime dans I'Archipel et en Asie, et sur la matiere medicale dans I'antiquite, in Journal des Savants, 1895, PP- 382-7.  
  * Bezold, F. von, Astrologische Geschichtsconstruction im Mittelalter, in Deutsche Zeitschrift f&uuml;r Geschichtswissenschaft, VIII (1892) 29ff.  
  * Bibliotheca Chemica. See Borel and Manget.  
  * Bj&ouml;rnbo, A.A. und Vogl, S. Alkindi, Tideus, und Pseudo-Euklid; drei optische Werke, Leipzig, 1911.
  * Black, W. H. Catalogue of the Ashmolean Manuscripts, Oxford, 1845.  
  * Boffito, P. G. II Commento di Cecco d'Ascoli all' Alcabizzo, Florence, 1905.  
Il De principiis astrologiae di Cecco d'Ascoli, in Giornale Storico della Letteratura Italiana, Suppl. 6, Turin, 1903.  
  * Perche fu condannato al fuoco I'astrologo Cecco d'Ascoli, in Studi e Documenti di Storia e Diritto, Publicazione periodica dell' accademia de conferenza Storico-Giuridiche, Rome, XX (1899).  
  * Boll, Franz. Die Erforschung der antiken Astrologie, in Neue Jahrb. f. d. klass. Altert., XI (1908) 103-26.  
Eine arabisch-byzantische Quelle des Dialogs Hermippus, in Sitzb. Heidelberg Akad., Philos. Hist. Classe (1912) No. 18, 28 pp. Sphaera, Leipzig, 1903.  
Studien &uuml;ber Claudius Ptolemaeus, in Jahrb. f. klass. Philol., Suppl. Bd. XXI.  
Zur &Uuml;eberlieferungsgeschichte d. griech. Astrologie u. Astronomie, in M&uuml;nch. Akad. Sitzb., 1899.  
  * Boll und Bezold, Stemglauben, Leipzig, 19 18; I have not seen. 
  * Bonatti, Guido. Liber astronomicus, Ratdolt, Augsburg, 1491.  
  * Boncompagni, B. Delia vita e delle Opere di Gherardo Cremonese traduttore del secolo duodecimo e di Gherardo da Sabbionetta astronomo del secolo decimoterzo, Rome, 1851.  
Della vita e delle opere di Guido Bonatti astrologo ed astronomo del secolo decimoterzo, Rome, 1851.  
Estratte dal Giornale Arcadico, Tomo CXXIII- CXXIV. Delia vita e delle opere di Leonardo Pisano, Rome, 1852.  
Intorno ad alcune opere di Leonardo Pisano, Rome, 1854.  
  * Borel, P. Bibliotheca Chimica seu catalogus librorum philosophicorum hermeticorum usque ad annum 1653, Paris, 1654. 
  * Bostock, J. and Riley, H. T. The Natural History of Pliny, translated with copious notes, London, 1855; reprinted 1887.
  * Bouche-Leclercq, A. L'astrologie dans le monde romain, in Revue Historique, vol. 65 (1897) 241-99.  
L'astrologie grecque, Paris, 1899, 658 pp.  
Histoire de la divination dans I'antiquite, 1879- 1882, 4 vols.  
  * Breasted, J. H. Development of Religion and Thought in Ancient Egypt, New York, 191 2.  
A History of Egypt, 1905; second ed., 1909.  
  * Brehaut, E. An Encyclopedist of the Dark Ages; Isidore of Seville, in Columbia University Studies in History, etc., vol. 48 (1912) 1-274.  
  * Brewer, J. S. Monumenta Franciscana (RS IV, i), London, 1858. 
  * Brown, J. Wood. An inquiry into the life and legend of Michael Scot, Edinburgh, 1897.  
  * Browne, Edward G. Arabian Medicine (the Fitzpatrick Lectures of 1919 and 1920), Cambridge University Press, 1921  
  * Browne, Sir Thomas. Pseudodoxia Epidemica, 1650.  
  * Bubnov, N. ed. Gerberti opera mathematica, Berlin, 1899.  
  * Budge, E. A. W. Egyptian Magic, London, 1899.  
Ethiopic Histories of Alexander by the Pseudo-Callisthenes and other writers, Cambridge University Press, 1896.  
Syriac Version of Pseudo-Callisthenes, Cambridge, 1889.  
Syrian Anatomy, Pathology, and Therapeutics, London, 1913, 2 vols. 
  * Bunbury, E. H. A History of Ancient Geography, London, 1879, 2 vols.  
  * Cahier et Martin, Melanges d'archeologie, d'histoire et de litterature, Paris, 1847-1856, 4 folio vols.  
  * Cajori, F. History of Mathematics; second edition, revised and enlarged, 1919.  
  * Cantor, M. Vorlesungen &uuml;ber Geschichte der Mathematik, 3rd edition, Leipzig, 1 899-1 908, 4 vols. Reprint of vol. II in 1913.  
  * Carini, S. I. Sulle Scienze Occulte nel Medio Evo, Palermo, 1872; I have not seen.  
  * Cauzons, Th. de. La magie et la sorcellerie en France, 1910, 4 vols.; largely compiled from secondary sources.  
  * Charles, E. Roger Bacon: sa vie, ses ouvrages, ses doctrines, Bordeaux, 1861.  
  * Charles, R. H. The Apocrypha and Pseudepigrapha of the Old Testament, English translation with introductions and critical and explanatory notes in conjunction with many scholars, Oxford, 191 3, 2 large vols.  
Ascension of Isaiah, 1900, and reprinted in 1917.  
The Book of Enoch, Oxford, 1893; translated anew, 1912.  
  * Charles, R. H. and Morfill, W. R. The Book of the Secrets of Enoch, Oxford, 1896.  
  * Charterius, Renatus ed. Galeni opera, Paris, 1679, 13 vols.  
  * Chartularium Universitatis Parisiensis, see Denifle et Chatelain.  
  * Chassang, A. Le merveilleux dans I'antiquite, 1882; I have not seen.  
  * Choulant, Ludwig. Albertus Magnus in seiner Bedeutung f&uuml;r die Naturwissenschaften historisch und bibliographisch dargestellt, in Janus, I (1846) I52ff.  
Die Anfange wissenschaftlicher Naturgeschichte und naturhistorischer Abbildung, Dresden, 1856.  
Handbuch der B&uuml;cherkunde fiir die altere Medicin, 2nd edition, Leipzig, 1841; like the foregoing, slighter than the title leads one to hope.  
ed. Macer Floridus de viribus herbarum una cum Walafridi Strabonis, Othonis Cremonensis et loannis Folcz carminibus similis argumenti, 1832.  
  * Christ, W. Geschichte der Griechischen Litteratur; see W. Schmid.  
  * Chwolson, D. Die Ssabier und der Ssabismus, Petrograd,
1856, 2 vols.  
  * Clement-Mullet, J. J. Essai sur la mineralogie arabe, Paris,
1868, in Journal asiatique. Tome XI, Serie VI.  
Traite des poisons de Maimonide, 1865.  
  * Clerval, Hermann le Dalmate, Paris, 1891, eleven pp.  
Les ecoles de Chartres au moyen age, Chartres, 1895.  
  * Cockayne, O. Leechdoms, Wortcunning, and Starcraft of Early England, in RS XXXV, London, 1864-1866, 3 vols.  
Narratiunculae anglice conscriptae, 1861.  
  * Congres Periodique International des Sciences Medicales,
17th Session, London, Section XXIII, History of Medicine, 1913.  
  * Cousin, V. See Abelard.  
  * Coxe, H. O. Catalogi Codicum Manuscriptorum Bibliothecae Bodleianae Pars Secunda Codices Latinos et Miscellaneos Laudianos complectens, Oxford, 1858-1885.  
  * Catalogi Codicum Manuscriptorum Bibliothecae Bodleianae Pars Tertia Codices Graecos et Latinos Canonicianos complectens, Oxford, 1854.  
  * Catalogus Codicum Manuscriptorum qui in collegiis aulisque Oxoniensibus hodie adservantur, 1852, 2 vols.  
  * Cumont, F. Astrology and Religion among the Greeks and Romans, 1912, 2 vols. And see CCAG under Abbreviations.  
  * Daremberg, Ch. V. Exposition des connaissances de Galien sur I'anatomie, la physiologic, et la pathologic du systeme nerveux, Paris, 1841.  
Histoire des sciences medicales, Paris, 1870, 2 vols.  
La medecine; histoire et doctrines, Paris, 1865.  
Notices et extraits des manuscrits medicaux, 1853.  
  * Delambre, J. B. J. Histoire de I'astronomie du moyen age, Paris, 1819.  
  * Delisle, L. Inventaire des manuscrits latins conserves a la bibhotheque nationale sous les numeros 8823- 186 13 et faisant suite a la serie dont la catalogue a ete public en 1744, Paris, 1863-1871.  
  * Denifle, H. Quellen zur Gelehrtengeschichte des Predigerordens im 13 und 14 Jahrhundert, in Archiv f. Lit. u. Kirchengesch. d. Mittelalters, Berlin, II (1886) 165-248.  
  * Denifle et Chatelain, Chartularium Universitatis Parisiensis, Paris, 1889 - 1891, 2 vols.  
  * Denis, F. Le monde enchante, cosmographie et histoire naturelles fantastiques du moyen age, Paris, 1843. A curious little volume with a bibliography of works now forgotten.  
  * Doutte, E. Magie et religion dans I'Afrique du Nord, Alger, 1909.  
  * Duhem, Pierre. Le Systeme du Monde : Histoire des Doctrines Cosmologiques de Platon a Copernic, 5 vols., Paris, 1913-1917. 
  * Du Prel, C. Die Magie als Naturwissenschaft, 1899, 2 vols. Occult speculation, not historical treatment; the author seems to have no direct acquaintance with sources earlier than Agrippa in the sixteenth century.  
  * Easter, D. B. A Study of the Magic Elements in the romans d'aventure and the romans bretons, Johns Hopkins, 1906.  
  * Ennemoser, J. History of Magic, London, 1854.  
  * Enoch, Book of. See Charles.  
  * Epiphanius. Opera ed. G.Dindorf, Leipzig, 1859-1862, 5 vols.
  * Evans, H.R. The Old and New Magic, Chicago, 1906.  
  * Fabricius, Bibliotheca Graeca, 1711.  
Bibliotheca Latina Mediae et Infimae Aetatis, 1734-1746, 6 vols.  
Codex Pseudepigraphus Veteris Testamenti, 1713-1733  
  * Farnell, L.R. Greece and Babylon; a comparative sketch of Mesopotamian, Anatolian, and Hellenic Religions, Edinburgh, 1911.  
The Higher Aspects of Greek Religion, New York, 1912.  
  * Ferckel, C. Die Gyn&auml;kologie des Thomas von Brabants. ausgewahlte Kapitel aus Buch I de naturis rerum beendetum 1240, Munich, 1912, in  
G.Klein,  Alte Meister d. Medizin u. Naturkunde.  
  * Ferguson, John, Bibliotheca Chemica, a catalogue of alchemical, chemical and pharmaceutical books in the collection of the late James Young, Glasgow, 1906.  
  * Fort, G. F. Medical Economy; a contribution to the history of European morals from the Roman Empire to 1400, New York, 1883. 
  * Fossi, F. Catalogus codicum saeculo XV impressorum qui in publica Bibliotheca Magliabechiana Florentiae adservantur, 1793-1795.  
  * Frazer, Sir J.G. Folk-Lore in the Old Testament, 3 vols., 1918.  
Golden Bough, edition of 1894, 2 vols.  
Magic Art and the Evolution of Kings, 2 vols., 1911.  
Some Popular Superstitions of the Ancients, in FolkLore, 1890.  
Spirits of the Corn and of the Wild, 2 vols., 1912.  
  * Garinet. Histoire de la Magie en France.  
  * Garrison, F. H. An Introduction to the History of Medicine, 2nd edition, Philadelphia, 1917.  
  * Gaster, M. A Hebrew Version of the Secretum secretorum, published for the first time, in Journal of the Royal Asiatic Society, London, 1907, pp. 879-913; 1908, pp. 111-62, 1065-84. 
  * Gerland, E. Geschichte der Physik von den &auml;ltesten Zeiten bis zum Ausgange des achtzehnten Jahrhunderts, in Konigl. Akad. d. Wiss., XXIV (1913) Munich and Berlin.  
  * Gerland und Traum&uuml;ller, Geschichte der Physikalischen Experimentierkunst, Leipzig, 1899.  
  * Giacosa,P. Magistri Salernitani nondum editi, Turin, 1901.  
  * Gilbert of England, Compendium medicinae, Lyons, 1510.  
  * Gloria, Andrea. Monumenti della Universita di Padova, 1222-1318, in Memorie del Reale Istituto Veneto di Scienze, Lettere ed Arti, XXII (1884).  
Monumenti della Universita di Padova, 1318-1405 1888.  
  * Gordon, Bernard. Lilium medicinae, Venice, 1496, etc. Practica (and other treatises), 1521.  
  * Grabmann, Martin. Forschungen iiber die lateinischen Aristoteles-Uebersetzungen des XIII Jahrhunderts, M&uuml;nster, 1916.  
Die Geschichte der Scholastischen Methode, Freiburg,
1909-1911, 2 vols.  
  * Graesse, J. G. T. Bibliotheca magica, 1843; of little service to me.  
  * Grenfell, B. P. The Present Position of Papyrology, in Bulletin of John Rylands Library, Manchester, VI (1921) 142-62.  
  * Haeser, H, Lehrbuch der Geschichte der Medicin und der Volkskrankheiten, Dritte Bearbeitung, 1875-1882, Halle, J. Zur Geschichte der Medizin von Hippokrates bis zum XVIII Jahrhundert, Munich, 1909, 199 pp.; too
brief, but suggests interesting topics.  
  * Halliwell, J. O. Rara Mathematica, 1839.  
  * Hammer- Jensen. Das sogennannte IV Buch der Meteorologie des Aristoteles, in Hermes, L (191 5) 113-36.  
Ptolemaios und Heron, Ibid., XLVIII (1913), 224ff.  
  * Hansen, J. Zauberwahn, Inquisition, und Hexenprozess im Mittelalter, Munich and Leipzig, 1900.
  * Haskins, C. H. Adelard of Bath, in EHR XXVI (1911)  
491-8; xxvm (1913), 515-6.  
Leo Tuscus, in EHR XXXIII (1918), 492-6.  
The "De Arte Venandi cum Avibus" of the Emperor Frederick II, EHR XXXVI (1921) 334-55.  
The Reception of Arabic Science in England, EHR XXX (1915), 56-69. 
The Greek Element in the Renaissance of the Twelfth  
Century, in American Historical Review, XXV (1920) 603-15.  
The Translations of Hugo Sanctelliensis, in Romanic Review, II (1911) 1-15.  
Nimrod the Astronomer, Ibid., V (1914) 203-12.  
A List of Text-books from the Close of the Twelfth Century, in Harvard Studies in Classical Philology, XX (1909) 75-94.  
  * Haskins and Lockwood. The Sicilian Translators of the
Twelfth Century and the First Latin Versions of Ptolemy's Almagest, Ibid., XXI (1910), 75-102.  
  * Haureau, B. Bernard Delicieux et i'inquisition albigeoise, Paris, 1887.  
Histoire de la philosophie scolastique, 1872 - 1880.  
Le Mathematicus de Bernard Silvestris, Paris, 1895.  
Les oeuvres de Hugues de Saint Victor, essai critique,
nouvelle edition, Paris, 1886.  
Melanges poetiques d'Hildebert de Lavardin.  
Notices et extraits de quelques mss latins de la bibliotheque nationale, 1890- 1893, 6 vols.  
Singularites historiques et litteraires, Paris, 1861.  
  * Heamshaw, F. J. C. Medieval Contributions to Modern Civilization, 1921.  
  * Heilbronner, J. C. Historia Matheseos universae praecipuorum mathematicorum vitas dogmata scripta et manuscripta complexa, Leipzig, 1742.  
  * Heim, R. De rebus magicis Marcelli medici, in Schedae
philol. Hermanno Usener oblatae, 1891, pp. 119-37.  
Incantamenta magica graeca latina, in Jahrb. f . cl. Philol., 19 suppl. bd., Leipzig, 1893, pp. 463-576.  
  * Heller, A. Geschichte der Physik von Aristoteles bis auf die
neueste Zeit, Stuttgart, 1882-1884, 2 vols.  
  * Hendrie, R. Theophili Libri III de diversis artibus, translated by, London, 1847.  
  * Hengstenberg, E. W. Die Geschichte Bileams und seine
Weissagungen, Berlin, 1842.  
  * Henry, V. La magie dans I'Inde antique, 1904.  
  * Henslow, G. Medical Works of the Fourteenth Century, London, 1899.  
  * Hercher, ed. Aeliani opera, 1864.  
ed. Artemidori Oneirocritica, Leipzig, 1864.  
ed. Astrampsychi oculorum decades, Berlin, 1863.  
  * Hertling, G. von, Albertus Magnus; Beitrage zu seiner
W&uuml;rdigung, revised edition with help of Baeumker and
Endres, M&uuml;nster, 1914.  
  * Hubert, H. Magia, in Daremberg-Saglio.  
  * Hubert et Mauss, Esquisse d'une Theorie Generale de la
Magie, in Annee Sociologique, 1902-1903, pp. 1-146.  
  * Husik, I. A History of Medieval Jewish Philosophy, 1916.  
  * Ishak ibn Sulaiman, Opera, 15 15.  
  * James, M. R. A Descriptive Catalogue of the McClean Collection of MSS in the Fitzwilliam Museum, 1912.  
A Descriptive Catalogue of the MSS in the Fitzwilliam
Museum, 1895.  
A Descriptive Catalogue of the MSS in the Library of
Corpus Christi College, Cambridge, 19 12, 2 vols,  
A Descriptive Catalogue of the MSS in the Library of
Gonville and Caius College, 1907- 1908, 2 vols.   
A Descriptive Catalogue of the MSS in the Library of
Pembroke College, 1905.  
A Descriptive Catalogue of the MSS in the Library
of Peterhouse, 1899.  
A Descriptive Catalogue of the MSS in the Library of
St. John's College, Cambridge, 191 3.  
A Descriptive Catalogue of the MSS in the Library of
Sidney Sussex College, Cambridge, 1895.  
The Ancient Libraries of Canterbury and Dover, 1903.  
The Western MSS in the Library of Emmanuel College, 1904.  
The Western MSS in the Library of Trinity College, Cambridge, 1900- 1904, 4 vols.  
  * Janus, Zeitschrift fiir Geschichte und Literatur der Medizin,
1846.  
  * Jenaer medizin-historische Beitrage, herausg. von T.M.Steineg, 1912.  
  * Joel, D. Der Aberglaube und die Stellung des Judenthums
zu demselben, 1881.  
  * John of Salisbury, Metalogicus, in Migne PL vol. 199.  
Polycraticus sive de nugis curialium et vestigiis philosophorum, Ibid, and also ed. C.C.L.Webb, Oxford, 1909.  
  * Joret, Les plantes dans I'antiquite et au moyen age, 2 vols., Paris, 1897 and 1904.  
  * Jourdain, A. Recherches critiques sur I'age et I'origine des
traductions latines d'Aristote, Paris, 1819; 2nd edition, 1843.  
  * Jourdain, C. Dissertation sur I'etat de la philosophic naturelle en Occident et principalement en France pendant la premiere moitie du Xlle siecle, Paris, 1838.  
Excursions historiques et philosophiques a travers le
moyen age, Paris, 1888.  
  * Karpinski, L.C, Hindu Science, in American Mathematical
Monthly, XXVI (1919) pp. 298-300.  
Robert of Chester's Latin translation of the Algebra of
al-Khowarizmi, with introduction, critical notes, and
an English version, New York, 1915.  
The "Quadripartitum numerorum" of John of Meurs,
in Bibliotheca Mathematica, III Folge, XIII Bd. (1913) 99-114.  
  * Kaufmann, A. Thomas von Chantimpre, Cologne, 1899.  
  * King, C.W. The Gnostics and their Remains, ancient and medieval, London, 1887.  
The Natural History, ancient and modern, of Precious
Stones and Gems, London, 1855.  
  * Kopp, H. Beitrage zur Geschichte der Chemie, Brunswick, 1869-1875.  
&Uuml;eber den Zustand der Naturwissenschaften im Mittelalter, 1869.  
  * Kretschmer, C. Die physische Erdkunde im christlichen
Mittelalter, 1889.  
  * Krumbacher, K. Geschichte der byzantinischen Literatur,
527-1453 A.D., 2nd edition, Munich, 1897.  
  * Kunz, G.F. The Curious Lore of Precious Stones, Philadelphia, 1913.  
Magic of Jewels and Charms, Philadelphia, 1915.  
  * Langlois, Ch. V. La connaissance de la nature et du monde
au moyen age d'apres quelques ecrits frangais a I'usage
des laics, Paris, 1911.  
Maitre Bernard, in Bibl. de I'7Eacute;cole des Chartes, LIV
(1893) 225-50, 795.  
  * Lauchert, F. Geschichte des Physiologus, Strassburg, 1889.  
  * Lea, H.C.A History of the Inquisition of the Middle
Ages, New York, 1883, 3 vols.  
  * Le Brun. Histoire critique des pratiques superstitieuses,
Amsterdam, 1733.  
  * Lecky, W.E.H. History of European Morals from Augustus to Charlemagne, 1870, 2 vols.  
History of the Rise and Influence of the Spirit of Rationalism in Europe, revised edition, London, 1870.  
  * Lehmann, A. Aberglaube und Zauberei von den altesten
Zeiten an bis in die Gegenwart; deutsche autorisierte
&Uuml;ebersetzung von I. Petersen, Stuttgart, 1908. The
historical treatment is scanty.  
  * Leminne, J. Les quatre elements, in Memoires couronnes
par I'Academie Royale de Belgique, vol. 65, Brussels, 1903.  
  * Levy, L.G. Maimonide, 1911.  
  * Liechty, R. de. Albert le Grand et saint Thomas d'Aquin,
ou la science au moyen age, Paris, 1880.  
  * Lippmann, E.O.von. Entstehung und Ausbreitung der Alchemic, 1919.  
  * Little, A. G. Initia operum Latinorum quae saeculis XIII, XIV, XV, attribuuntur, Manchester, 1904.  
ed. Roger Bacon Essays, contributed by various writers on the occasion of the commemoration of the seventh centenary of his birth, Oxford, 1914.  
ed. Part of the Opus Tertium of Roger Bacon, including a Fragment now printed for the first time, Aberdeen, 1912, in British Society of Franciscan Studies, IV.  
  * Loisy. Magie, science et religion, in A propos d'histoire des religions, 1911, p.166ff.  
  * Macdonald, D.B. The Religious Attitude and Life in Islam, Chicago, 1909.  
  * Macray, Catalogus codicum MSS Bibliothecae Bodleianae,  
V, Codices Rawlinsonianae, 1862-1900, 5 fascs.; IX,  
Codices Digbeianae, 1883.  
  * Mai, A. Classici Auctores, 1835.
  * Male, E. Religious Art in France in the Thirteenth Century, translated from the third edition by Dora Nussey, 1913.
  * Mandonnet, P. Des ecrits authentiques de S. Thomas d'Aquin, Fribourg, 1910.  
Roger Bacon et la composition des trois Opus, in Revue Neo-Scolastique, Louvain, 191 3, pp. 52-68, 164-80.  
Roger Bacon et la Speculum astronomiae, Ibid., XVII (1910) 313-35. 
Siger de Brabant et I'averroisme latin au Xlllme siecle,  
Fribourg, 1899; 2nd edition, Louvain, 1908-1910, 2 vols.  
  * Manget, J. J. Bibliotheca Chemica Curiosa, Geneva, 1702,2 vols.
  * Manitius, Max. Geschichte der lateinischen Literatur des Mittelalters, Erster Teil, Von Justinian bis zur Mitte des zehnten Jahrhunderts, Munich, 191 1, in Miiller's Handbuch d. kl. Alt. Wiss. IX, 2, i.  
  * Mann, M.F. Der Bestiaire Divin des Guillaume le Clerc, 1888. 
Der Physiologus des Philipp von Thaon und seine Quellen, 1884.
  * Mappae clavicula, ed. M.A. Way in Archaeologia, London, XXXII (1847) 183-244.
  * Maury, Alfred. La magie et I'astrologie dans Tantiquite et au moyen age, 1877, Brief as it is, perhaps the best general history of magic.
  * Mead, G.R.S. Apollonius of Tyana; a critical study of the only existing record of his life, 1901.  
Echoes from the Gnosis, 1906, eleven vols.  
Fragments of a Faith Forgotten, 1900.  
Pistis-Sophia, now for the first time Englished, 1896.  
Plotinus, Select Works of, with preface and bibliography, 1909.  
Simon Magus, 1892.  
Thrice Great Hermes, London, 1906, 3 vols.  
  * Medicae artis principes post Hippocratem et Galenurn Graeci Latinitate donati, ed. Stephanus, 1567.
  *  Medici antiqui omnes qui latinis litteris . . . Aldus, Venice, 1547-  
  *  Mely, F.de et Ruelle, C.E. Les lapidaires de Tantiquite et du moyen age, Paris, 1896. Mely has published many other works on gems and lapidaries of the past.  
  *  Merrifield, Mrs. M. P. Ancient Practice of Painting, or Original Treatises dating from the Xllth to XVIIIth centuries on the arts of painting, London, 1849.  
  *  Meyer, E. Albertus Magnus, ein Beitrag zur Geschichte der Botanik im XIII Jahrhundert, in Linnaea, X (1836) 641-741, XI (1837) 545.  
  *  Meyer, Karl. Der Aberglaube des Mittelalters und der nachstfolgenden Jahrhunderte, Basel, 1856.  
  *  Migne, Dictionnaire des Apocryphes, Paris, 1856. See also under Abbreviations.  
  *  Millot-Carpentier, La Medecine au XI He siecle, in Annales Internationales d'Histoire, Congres de Paris, 1900, 5e Section, Histoire des Sciences, pp. 171-96; a chapter from a history of medicine which the author's death unfortunately kept him from completing.  
  *  Milward, E. A Letter to the Honourable Sir Hans Sloane, Bart., in vindication of the character of those Greek writers in physick that flourished after Galen. . . particularly that of Alexander Trallian, 1733; reprinted as Trallianus Reviviscens, 1734.  
  *  Mommsen, Th. ed. C. lulii Solini Collectanea rerum memorabilium, 1895.  
  *  Moore, Sir Norman, History of the Study of Medicine in the British Isles, 1908.  
The History of St. Bartholomew's Hospital, London, 1918, 2 vols.  
The Physician in EngHsh History, 191 3. A popular lecture.  
  * Muratori, L. A. Antiquitates Italicae medii aevi, Milan, 1738-1742, 6 vols. Edition of 1778 in more vols. Index, Turin, 1885.  
See also under Abbreviations.
  * Naude, Gabriel. Apologie pour tous les grands personnages qui ont este faussement soupQonnez de Magie, Paris, 1625.  
  * Neckam, Alexander. De naturis rerum, ed. T. Wright, in RS vol. 34, 1863.  
  * Omont, H. Nouvelles acquisitions du department des manuscrits pendant les annees 1891-1910, Bibliotheque Nationale, Paris.  
  * Orr, M. A. (Mrs. John Evershed) Dante and the Early Astronomers, London, 1913.  
  * Paetow, L. J. Guide to the Study of Medieval History, University of California Press, 1917.  
  * Pagel, J. L. Die Concordanciae des Joannes de Sancto Amando, 1894.  
Geschichte der Medizin im Mittelalter, in Puschmann's Handbuch der Geschichte der Medizin, ed. Neuburger u. Pagel, I (1902) 622-752.   
Neue litterarische Beitrage zur mittelalterlichen Medicin, Berlin, 1896.  
  * Pangerl, A. Studien iiber Albert den Grossen, in Zeitschrift f&uul;r katholische Theologie, XXII (1912) 304-46, 512-49, 784-800.  
  * Pannier, L. Les lapidaires frangais du moyen age, Paris, 1882.  
  * Payne, J. F. English Medicine in Anglo-Saxon Times, 1904.  
The Relation of Harvey to his Predecessors and especially to Galen: Harveian oration of 1896, in The Lancet, Oct. 24, 1896, ii36ff.  
  * Perna. Artis quam chemiam vocant antiquissimi auctores, Basel, 1572.  
  * Perrier, T. La medecine astrologique, Lyons, 1905, 88 pp. Slight.  
  * Petrus de Prussia. Vita B. Alberti Magni, 1621.  
  * Petrus Hispanus. Summa experimentorum sive thesaurus pauperum, Antwerp, 1497.
  * Philips, H. Medicine and Astrology, 1867.  
  * Picavet, F. Esquisse d'une histoire comparee des philosophies medievales, 2nd edition, Paris, 1907.  
  * Pico della Mirandola. Opera omnia, 1519.  
  * Pistis-Sophia, ed. Schwartze und Petermann, Coptic and Latin, 185 1. Now for the first time Englished, by G. R. S. Mead, 1896.  
  * Pitra, J. B. Analecta novissima, 1885 - 1888.  
Analecta sacra, 1876- 1882.  
Spicilegium solesmense, 1852-1858.  
  * Poisson, Theories et symboles des Alchimistes, Paris, 1891.  
  * Poole, R. L. Illustrations of the History of Medieval Thought in the Departments of Theology and Ecclesiastical Politics, 1884; revised edition, 1920.  
The Masters of the Schools at Paris and Chartres in John of Salisbury's Time, in EHR XXXV (1920) 321-42.  
  * Pouchet, F. A. Histoire des sciences naturelles au moyen age, ou Albert le Grand et son epoque considere comme point de depart de I'ecole experimentale, Paris, 1853.  
  * Ptolemy. Quadripartitum, 1484, and other editions. Optica, ed. G.Govi, Turin, 1885.  
  * Puccinotti, F. Storia della Medicina, 1850-1870, 3 vols.  
  * Puschmann, Th. Alexander von Tralles, Originaltext und
&Uuml;ebersetzung nebst einer einleitenden Abhandlung, Vienna, 1878 - 1879.  
Handbuch der Geschichte der Medizin, Jena, 1902-1905, 3 vols. Really a cooperative work under the editorship of Max Neuburger and Julius Pagel after Puschmann's death.  
A History of Medical Education from the most remote to the most recent times, London, 1891, English translation.  
  * Quetif, J. et Echard J. Scriptores Ordinis Praedicatorum, Paris, 1719.  
  * Rambosson, A. Histoire et legendes des plantes, Paris, 1887.  
  * Rashdall, H. ed. Fratris Rogeri Bacon Compendium Studii Theologiae, 1911.  
The Universities of Europe in the Middle Ages, Oxford, 1895, 3 vols, in 2.  
  * Rasis (Muhammad ibn Zakariya) Opera, Milan, 1481, and Bergamo, 1497.  
  * Regnault, J. La sorcellerie: ses rapports avec les sciences biologiques, 1897, 345 pp.  
  * Reitzenstein, R. Poimandres, Leipzig, 1904.  
  * Renzi, S. de. Collectio Salernitana, 1 852-1 859, 5 vols.  
  * Rose, Valentin. Anecdota graeca et graeco-latina, Berlin, 1864.  
Aristoteles De lapidibus und Arnoldus Saxo, in Zeitschrift f&uuml;r deutsches Alterthum, XVIII (1875) 321-447.
Ptolemaeus und die Schule von Toledo, in Hermes, VIII (1874) 327-49.  
ed. Plinii Secundi lunioris de medicina libri tres, Leipzig, 1875.  
&Uuml;eber die Medicina Plinii, in Hermes, VIII (1874) 19-66.  
Verzeichnis der lateinischen Handschriften der K, Bibliothek zu Berlin, Band XII (1893), XIII (1902-1903-1905).  
  * Ruska, J. Das Steinbuch des Aristoteles . . . nach der arabischen Handschrift, Heidelberg, 1912.  
Der diamant in der Medizin, in Deutsche Gesell, f. Gesch. d. Mediz. u. d. Naturwiss., Zwanzig Abhandl. z. Gesch. d. Mediz., 1908.  
Zur &auml;lteren arabischen Algebra und Rechenkunst, Heidelberg, 1917.  
  * Rydberg, V. The Magic of the Middle Ages, 1879, translated from the Swedish. Popular.  
  * Salverte, E. Des sciences occultes, ou essai sur la magie, Paris, 1843.  
  * Sanchez Perez, J.A. Biografias de Matematicos Arabes que florecieron en Espafia, Madrid, 1921.  
  * Schanz, M. Geschichte der R&ouml;mischen Litteratur, Dritter Teil, Munich, 1905 ; Vierter Teil, Erste H&auml;lfte, Munich, 1914, in Miiller's Handbuch d. klass. Alt. Wiss., VIII, 3.  
  * Schepss, G. ed. Priscillani quae supersunt, 1889.  
  * Schindler. Der Aberglaube des Mittelahers, Breslau, 1858.  
  * Schmid, W. Die Nachklassiche Periode der Griechischen Litteratur, 1913, in M&uuml;ller's Handb. d. kl. Alt. Wiss., VII, ii, 2.  
  * Schum, W. Beschriebendes Verzeichnis der Amplonianischen Handschriften-Sammlung zu Erfurt, Berlin, 1887.  
  * Sighart, J. Albertus Magnus: sein Leben und seine Wissenschaft, Ratisbon, 1857; French translation, Paris, 1862; partial English translation by T. A. Dixon, London, 1876.  
  * Singer, Charles. Early English Magic and Medicine, 1920, 34 pp.  
"Science," pp. 106-48 in "Medieval Contributions to Modern Civilization," ed. F.J.C. Hearnshaw, 1921.  
Studies in the History and Method of Science, Oxford, 1917; a second volume appeared in May, 1921.  
  * Stapper, Richard. Papst Johannes XXI, M&uuml;nster, 1898, in Kirchengesch. Studien herausg. v. Dr. Knopfler, IV, 4.  
  * Steele, R. Opera hactenus inedita Rogeri Baconi, 1905-1920.  
  * Steinschneider, Moritz. Abraham ibn Ezra, in Abhandl., (1880) 57-128.  
Apollonius von Thyana (oder Balinas) bei den Arabern, in Zeitschrift d. deutschen morgenl&auml;ndischen Gesellschaft, XLV (1891) 439-46.  
Arabische Lapidarien, Ibid., XLIX (1895).  
Constantinus Africanus und seine arabischen Quellen, in Virchow's Archiv f&uuml;r pathologische Anatomic, etc., Berlin, XXXVII (1866) 351-410.  
Der Aberglaube, Hamburg, 1900, 34 pp.  
Die europaischen &Uuml;ebersetzungen aus dem Arabischen bis Mitte des 17 Jahrhunderts, in Sitzungsberichte d. kaiserl. Akad. d. Wiss., Philos. Hist. Klasse, Vienna, CXLIX, 4 (1905) ; CLI, I (1906).  
Lapidarien, ein culturgeschichtlicher Versuch, in Semitic Studies in memory of Rev. Dr. Alexander Kohut, Berlin, 1897, pp. 42-72.  
Maschallah, in Zeitsch. d. deut. morgenl. GeselL, LIII (1899), 434-40.   
Zum Speculum astronomicum des Albertus Magnus &uuml;ber die darin angef&uuml;hrten Schriftsteller und Schriften, in Zeitschrift f&uuml;r Mathematik und Physik, Leipzig, XVI (1871)357-96.  
Z&uuml;r alchimistischen Literatur der Araber, in Zeitsch, d. deut. morgenl. Gesell., LVIII (1904) 299-315.  
Z&uuml;r pseudepigraphischen Literatur insbesondere der geheimen Wissenschaften des Mittelalters; aus hebraischen und arabischen Quellen, Berlin, 1862.  
  * Stephanus, H. Medicae artis principes post Hippocratem et Galenum Graeci Latinitate donati, et Latini, 1567.  
  * Strunz, Franz. Geschichte der Naturwissenschaften im Mittelalter, Stuttgart, 1910, 120 pp. Without index or references.  
  * Studien zur Geschichte der Medizin herausgegeben von der Puschmann-Stiftung an der Universitat Leipzig, 1907-.  
  * Sudhoff, Karl. His various articles in the foregoing publication and other periodicals of which he is an editor lie in large measure just outside our period and field, but some will be noted later in particular chapters.  
  * Suter, H. Die Mathematiker und Astronomen der Araber, in Abhandl., X (1900) 1-277; XIV (1902) 257-85.  
Die astronomischen Tafeln des Muhammed ibn Musa-al-Khwarizmi, Copenhagen, 1914.  
  * Tanner, T. Bibliotheca Britannico-Hibernica, London, 1748. Still much cited but largely antiquated and unreliable.  
  * Tavenner, E, Studies in Magic from Latin Literature, NewYork, 1916.  
  * Taylor, H. O. The Classical Heritage, 1901.  
  * The Medieval Mind, 2nd edition, 1914, 2 vols; 3rd edition, 1919.  
  * Theatrum chemicum. See Zetzner.  
  * Theatrum chemicum Britannicum. See Ashmole.  
  * Theophilus Presbyter, Schedula diversarum artium, ed. A. Ilg, Vienna, 1874; English translation by R. Hendrie, London, 1847.  
  * Thomas of Cantimpre, Bonum universale de apibus, 1516.  
  * Thompson, D'Arcy W. Aristotle as a Biologist, 1913.  
Glossary of Greek Birds, Oxford, 1895.  
Historia animalium, Oxford, 1910; vol. IV in the English translation of The Works of Aristotle edited by J. A. Smith and W. D. Ross.  
  * Thorndike, Lynn. Adelard of Bath and the Continuity of Universal Nature, in Nature, XCIV (191 5) 616-7.
A Roman Astrologer as a Historical Source: Julius Firmicus Maternus, in Classical Philology, VIII (1913) 415-35.  
Natural Science in the Middle Ages, in Popular Science Monthly (now The Scientific Monthly), LXXXVII (1915) 271-91.  
Roger Bacon and Gunpowder, in Science, XLII (1915), 799-800.  
Roger Bacon and Experimental Method in the Middle Ages, in The Philosophical Review, XXIH (1914), 271-98.  
Some Medieval Conceptions of Magic, in The Monist, XXV (1915). 107-39.  
The Attitude of Origen and Augustine toward Magic, in The Monist, XIX (1908), 46-66.  
The Place of Magic in the Intellectual History of Europe, Columbia University Press, 1905.  
The True Roger Bacon, in American Historical Review, XXI (1916), 237-57, 468-80.  
  * Tiraboschi. Storia della Letteratura Italiana, Modena, 1772-1795.
  * Tischendorf, C. Acta Apostolorum Apocrypha, Leipzig, 1851.  
Evangelia Apocrypha, Leipzig, 1876.  
  * Toply, R. von, Studien zur Geschichte der Anatomic im Mittelalter, 1898.   
  * Unger, F. Die Pflanze als Zaubermittel, Vienna, 1859.  
  * Vacant, A. et Mangenot, E. Dictionnaire de theologie catholique, Paris 1909-.  
  * Valentinelli, J. Bibliotheca manuscripta ad S. Marci Venetiarum, Venice, 1868-1876, 6 vols.
  *  Valois, Noel. Guillaume d'Auvergne, eveque de Paris, 1228-1249. Sa vie et ses ouvrages, Paris, 1880.  
  * Vincent of Beauvais. Speculum doctrinale, 1472 (?).  
Speculum historiale, 1473.  
Speculum naturale, Anth. Koburger, Niimberg, 1485.  
  * Vossius, G.J. De Universae Matheseos natura et constitutione liber, Amsterdam, 1650.  
  * Walsh, J.J. Medieval Medicine, 1920, 221 pp.   
Old Time Makers of Medicine; the story of the students and teachers of the sciences related to medicine during the middle ages, New York, 1911.   Popular.  
The Popes and Science, 1908.  
  * Webb, C.C.I. See John of Salisbury.
  * Webster, Hutton. Rest Days, 1916.
  * Wedel, T. C. The Medieval Attitude toward Astrologyparticularly in England, Yale University Press, 1920.  
  * Wellmann, Max. ed. Dioscorides de materia medica, 1907, 1906.  
Die Schrift des Dioskurides peri haplon pharmakon, 1914.  
  * White, A.D. A History of the Warfare of Science with Theology in Christendom, New York, 1896, 2 vols.
  * Wickersheimer, Ernest. Figures medico-astrologiques des neuvieme, dixieme et onzieme siecles, in Transactions of the Seventeenth International Congress of Medicine, Section XXIII, History of Medicine, London, 1913, p- 313 ff.  
  * William of Auvergne. Opera omnia, Venice, 1591.  
  * Withington, E, T. Medical History from the Earliest Times, London, 1894.  
  * Wright, Thomas. Popular Treatises on Science written during the middle ages in Anglo-Saxon, Anglo-Norman, and English, London, 1841,  
ed. Alexander Neckam De naturis rerum, in RS vol. 34, 1863.  
  * Wulf, M. de. History of Medieval Philosophy, 1909, English translation.  
  * Wiistenfeld, F. Geschichte der Arabischen Aerzte und Naturforscher, Gottingen, 1840.  
  * Yule, Sir Henry, The Book of Ser Marco Polo, third edition revised by Henri Cordier, 2 vols., London, 1903.  
  * Zarncke, F. Der Priester Johannes, in Abhandl. d. philolohist. Classe, Kgl. Sachs. Gesell. d. Wiss., VII (1879), 627-1030; VIII (1883), 1-186.  
  * Zetzner, L. Theatrum chemicum, 161 3- 1622, 6 vols.
  
  
